--- Page 1 ---
TIGHT BINDING
Absence of inner
margins

*(Note: The provided text was in French, not Latin.)*

--- Page 2 ---
*(Note: The provided text is in French, not Latin. The translation below is from French to English.)*

**Previous page text for continuity:**
[Graphic of an open book with two arrows pointing towards the center gutter]

TIGHT BINDING
Absence of margins
internal

---

[A stylized line drawing of an artist's palette with two brushes.]

Beginning of a series of documents
in color

--- Page 3 ---
[A simple line drawing of an artist's palette with two brushes]

End of a series of documents
in color

**Previous page text for continuity:**
[A stylized line drawing of an artist's palette with two brushes.]

Beginning of a series of documents
in color

***
*Note: The provided text was in French, not Latin. The translation above is from French to English.*

--- Page 4 ---
[Handwritten note at top]
T. T. d: 1. fol.

O F F R A N C I S C U S
G E O R G I U S T H E V E N E T I A N,
O F T H E M I N O R I T E F A M I L Y,
Three Canticles concerning the harmony of the whole World. With
an index of those things which seemed worthy of note
while reading, now recently added.

[Manicule pointing right] Let those approve such things, in whom the spirit breathes.

[Circular stamp: ROYAL UNIVERSITY FACULTY OF THEOLOGY, PARIS.]

[Circular stamp: LIBRARY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF FRANCE]

With privilege.

I N P A R I S
By Andreas Berthelin, on the street of Saint James, in the house
of Gulielmus Roland under the sign of the golden crown: & in the Lombard
Street in the house of the same G. Roland.

( 1 5 4 5. )

[Handwritten inscription at bottom]
From the Library of the Monastery of Saint Bernard, Paris.
Of the Congregation of Saint Maur [unclear]ensis.

--- Page 5 ---
- Title: PROEM.
- FRANCIS GEORGE OF VE-
- NICE, of the Minorite family, in his work on the harmony of the world,
- divided into three parts, to Clement the Seventh,
- Supreme Pontiff.
- PREFACE.
- [Large Initial N] O, CERTAINLY NOT, MOST BLESSED FATHER,
- am I led by any pride, nor according to flesh and blood, but by a good
- genius, indeed, and by a better spirit, so that for those less enlightened,
- I may try to light this humble torch, certainly
- not of a new light, but that which glows forth from that light illuminating all.
- And so that from the Lord's most abundant harvest, I may bring into the Lord's
- granary for feeding the poor, at least even
- small gleanings, left for posterity by other reapers, perhaps by the Lord's command:
- from which we have threshed the wheat, certainly not new, but ancient, brought together in a certain
- new form, and worked in a new way, with water, beyond doubt, not from broken
- cisterns, but of better and salutary wisdom: from which, to the one drinking, becomes a fountain of
- water springing up into eternal life: Those drawing this water, who first of the Evangelical

--- Page 6 ---
PROOEMIVM.

Pharao.
Philoft.
Lyfides.

Hierocl.

Plotinus

Proculus

Paulus.

...they might emulate in their way of life. Likewise, among the lower Indians, Pharaotes taught, if we believe Philostratus. Lysides the Pythagorean, writing to Hipparchus, also teaches that it is by no means pious to make the mysteries of true philosophy, which clearly savors of the divine, common to those who could not even dream of the purification of the soul: for neither can a bleary and unclean eye (as Hierocles drew from the storehouses of the ancients who followed these paths) gaze upon things too bright: Nor will anyone newly devoted to sacred rites, not well initiated, be able to immediately perceive those divine illuminations: because one awakened from sleep cannot immediately contemplate bright things. Therefore, the soul must be accustomed to beautiful studies and gradually purified, until the Divine light shines forth, and our intellect (as Plotinus says) shines forth within us: which may apply the soul to the Father and the true light: and place it unmixed in the understandings of the Creator: And let light (says Proclus) join light, not such as that which is said to belong to the sciences, but something more beautiful and more unified. Hence Abraham, the princes of the chosen family, and teachers of true wisdom, gathered with God, who, made gods, were vehemently elevated to receive that light: which, very far removed from mortals, the dark Jews considered a scandal, and the impious Gentiles, foolishness, but with eyes illuminated, it was seen as the most beautiful splendor, and the true storehouse of all treasures and most complete wisdom. Hence with great constancy, even at the risk of life, they tried with all their soul to defend it: To which treasures also (as Paul teaches) one does not arrive through philosophy, namely, this [philosophy] handed down by men, and empty deceit, but it is perceived by that light, through which, ascending from clarity to clarity, we are finally transformed into the same image of Him who is the splendor of the Father and His true image. But since the number of the illuminated who can receive that radiant light is very small, hence I think that those who wish to be initiated in this way should be led along those paths through which they can be more easily disposed to perceive that supreme light: And these paths are undoubtedly through these visible things to the invisible things of God, from the harmonic kinship which they have most consonant with each other. Therefore, concerning the consonance of both worlds and the archetype, and concerning the state of all things, and of all those things which each world itself (as it receives from the archetype) embraces with the greatest harmony, for such an easier guidance, we have opportunely thought it fit to treat: For those wishing to do this, we must take a journey through many paths, because all the artificial remedies of the disciplines must be met: Physics, Arithmetic, Astronomy, Geometry, Music, and Divine [disciplines]. Therefore, if there will be a treatment of things which are subject to the senses, then the Peripatetics with their sensible doctrine will support [us]: If we investigate celestial things, we will rely on the demonstrations of astronomers: If we examine the harmony of natural things, we will direct our path to the more secret philosophers: If a treatise is to be had concerning the variety of stars, and concerning that which is from diverse aspects, motions, and the harmony of sounds, it will immediately be resolved by musical reasons: If we attempt to explain the supreme intelligences and supercelestial mysteries in any way, having removed all these, and left them in the vestibule, we will approach the prophets and saints, to whom it has been given by a special gift to know the secrets of the living God, or we will implore that light which illuminates all and instructs best in such matters. If, however, for some reason we wish to be lifted from these visible things to the celestial and supramundane inner sanctuaries, that will be for us (error set aside) the unique path through numbers, by which these lower things, connected with the higher things by their harmonic proportion, present themselves most sweetly to those contemplating, and by mutual correspondence and inherent power, they offer the easiest way to those working: For all things are arranged by numbers, and thence so familiar to all, that nothing hinders them: for, related to the higher things, they ascend familiarly to the celestial: and again, when...

--- Page 7 ---
PROLOGUE.

they deal intimately with sensible things: and thence they assume diverse natures and diverse modes. For number, which (as Proculus says) always exists the same, is yet one thing in voice, another in the proportion of things, another in soul and reason, and another in divine things; and that which is bound in created things is found most absolutely familiar to God. [Marginal note: Proculus] But speaking of lower things, Themistius and Boethius so much prefer number that they believe no one can philosophize rightly without it. [Marginal note: Themi. Boëtius. Pythag. Academ. Theolo. Auenzo. Plato.] But the Pythagoreans, all together, and the Academics, but especially the more reclusive theologians, everywhere celebrate and venerate numbers: and not undeservedly, because, as Avenzoar the Babylonian reports, he rightly knows all things who knows well how to count. To whom Plato assents, saying in Epimonides: If anyone wishes to remove number from human nature, he by no means leaves them prudent or scientific: For the soul will perceive nothing without reason: Nor will anyone be able to give an account of things who is ignorant of number. Arts also, with number removed, entirely vanish: and what is greatest, he asserts that number is the cause of all good things, but of no evil. Hence, he who is to be blessed, who desires to explore celestial and divine things, ought not to be ignorant of number. Therefore, we must necessarily proceed through the paths of numbers and harmonic order, if we wish to ascend rightly and suitably through these lower things to the higher and the highest. For all things correspond to each other, and primarily with mutual harmonies, yet with different numbers: Which Orpheus sang, and after him Pythagoras taught, and also the Stoics confess, when they say the world was made by applying a certain harmonizing art. [Marginal note: Orpheus Pythag. Stoici. Plato. Porphy. Iablicus. Chalci. Proculus Syria.] Plato proposes it, Porphyry asserts it with many reasons, Iamblichus, Chalcidius, Proculus, and his teacher Syrianus declare it, and as many as are of the Pythagorean and Academic family interpret and affirm it to the best of their ability, believing that nature had nothing more ancient or more suitable than harmony, both in things produced and in things to be produced, by which all parts of this harmonious machine might be rendered. But divine prophets, leaving lower numbers far behind and introduced to divine and more secret inner chambers, contemplated many things not to be revealed, hiding the better parts of which in their heart, lest they should transgress, and offered some, and a few, for us to contemplate, as much as was permitted to them. From whom Isaiah says: I saw the Lord sitting upon a high and exalted throne, [Marginal note: Iſaias.] namely, over this whole worldly house, whose heaven is his seat, and this full of the glory of its maker: which shines harmoniously in the series of distributed ranks with his divine exemplary offices. Whence the harmony and mutual love between the artisan and the fabric, sung by two seraphim crying out to each other with alternating voices: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Sabaoth, The whole earth is full of his glory, communicated to each by a harmonious proportion through related numbers, by which all things are arranged. Therefore, absorbed in these measures and most consonant harmonies, the celestial prophets, leaving vocal numbers and their reasons in the vestibules, philosophized in better and divine numbers, in the species and forms of nature, indeed, in the exemplars themselves through all genera of ideas, proceeding in a certain order known only to those who have seen. To this also Ezekiel, Isaiah's colleague, applied himself, when he beheld the divine tribunal, which the Hebrews call Mercava, [Marginal note: Ezechiel Hebræi.] composed of divine ministers, Seraphim, Ophianim, and animals of holiness, made to be brought into the harmony of all things, concluding the whole matter, he said: And their appearance was like האופן בתוך האופן haophan betoc haophan, that is, a wheel within a wheel, as for now we follow our translation, because this spherical worldly house is in the middle of that intelligible and supreme wheel and sphere, that is, in the Word, which in that supramundane wheel...
a iij

--- Page 8 ---
**PROEM.**

[Marginal note: Ioannes] ...it possesses the middle, as John says: "That which has been made, in him was life." In him, as if in the Word, by which the Father carries and sustains all things, and which John, a true prophet, saw on the two-peaked Parnassus, namely Christ's breast, in which the two pinnacles of divine and human nature, respectively, stand out. [Marginal note: Moſes.] Moses, the first revealer of these sacraments, saw the same thing on the two-peaked Sinai, from which that truly happy Arabia (I will not name it, but it obtained the thing) derived its blessing. Hence, he spoke face to face with the divine countenance very often, and contemplated the peaks of subsequent effects. But he enclosed these in most hidden enigmas in his weighty and most fruitful description of the mundane fabric, deeming the rude and unlearned common people unworthy of the secrets of both worlds. For the most sublime light was not to be presented to the duller eyes of a people so weak that they could not gaze upon the face of Moses, glowing with that light from divine communion, unless he suppressed the splendor itself with a veil drawn over it (as their blinking eyes required). Therefore, he delivered the deepest sacraments to the unlearned people under the coverings of narrated history, leaving a place apart for the wise, so that they might approach the innermost sanctuaries of profound wisdom and supreme doctrine with the curtain drawn aside and the face unveiled, to contemplate that storehouse openly at times, and at times to proceed from the weak and visible to the invisible through those related numbers and harmonic proportions, from which both the wiser Hebrews and our own have added moral, allegorical, and anagogical senses. Hence, these lower things are moved by higher things with greater efficacy, inasmuch as natural and divine things are more excellent than those which are acquired by art. For by this [Marginal note: Pythag. Cicero. Boëtius. Terpan. Arion. Iſmeni. Dion.] musical art, Pythagoras (as Cicero and Boethius relate) restrained a raging youth by changing the modes. Terpander and Arion of Methymna, Lesbians and Ionians, and Ismenias the Theban cured very many afflicted with most severe diseases with harmonies. The song of trumpets and clarions also incites the spirits of soldiers and horses. Dion also relates concerning Alexander the Macedonian that he was sometimes so incited by Timotheus's modes that he would leap to arms as if raging. For sacred purposes also, King Saul's madness was so tempered by David's lyre that he was restored to his former peace, the evil demon having been put to flight, who, collapsing from that harmony, cannot endure any true harmony, as if it were hostile to him. Hence, I believe that singing and harmonic sounds were introduced into sacred rites by the royal prophet himself, the true restorer of sacred things, and by those fathers who perceived these sacraments of God and nature. What power, therefore, and what delight is to be thought to be inherent in the harmony of natural and divine things? Hence, truth, which is the agreement of things, even when explained in lower things, is most efficacious and brings delight, filled with wonderful pleasantness, to those who perceive it. But in divine things, it so exhilarates and moves the soul that it seems to transform it entirely into another state, especially in David's hymns, which, repeated so often, are never tiresome to well-composed souls, but rather delight and favor them greatly. For in them, as if in a certain singing of the whole law, are chanted the measures of both worlds with their archetype, and that consonance which has been restored to all things by the Messiah, and by what sweet step his most perfect work returns to the maker. And not only this royal prophet, but all who contributed to the sacred page were such that in them we can admire both an ample knowledge of true harmony and divinity, and a profound study of other doctrines. For who does not see all the prophets instructed in true poetry? Who does not recognize the most exact geometric measures in Moses, Ezekiel, and John? And again, in Moses, Ezekiel, Daniel, and John, the proportions of numbers, and

--- Page 9 ---
**PROEM.**

...in Davidic hymns, and Solomon's epithalamium, and in the entire description of both testaments, as if in a full epithalamium, the sweetest harmony of perfect music? Of music, I say, more sublime than that of Orpheus, Amphion, and such: but everywhere, and widely from them, you will imbibe draughts of true philosophy of both kinds, provided you have learned to philosophize well. These, therefore, are the leaders to be followed by us; these are the teachers to be imitated, and whatever we undertake is to be formed according to their measure. But truly, Most Blessed Father, what has been handed down by most to memory is that Mercury, Aglaophemus, Orpheus, Hesiod, Pythagoras, Archytas, Plato, Parmenides, Charondas, Zalmoxis, Lycurgus, and finally all those who followed them and philosophized brilliantly, or gave laws, did not derive what they taught from any other source: We have also deemed these (so that we may make all agree, as far as is right) to be admitted insofar as they appear to be in harmony with our harmony, which we have decided to undertake; but if they should be dissonant anywhere, they are to be rejected no differently than useless strings. Therefore, following those ancient fathers in their footsteps, among other names of things, but most especially that of the Creator himself, we shall endeavor to render them into our Latin, as they themselves handed them down, or at least as close as possible: so that we may more clearly express their profound meanings and sacraments, which lie hidden in those described characters of theirs, so much so that Origen believes that when translated into another idiom, they retain very little of their proper force. [Marginal note: Origen.] Therefore, I ought not to be considered a trivial or curious author of novelty, if we use the original words themselves, or those very close to them. Nor let it be judged superfluous and useless if we seem to repeat some things often, because the same things, needing to be fitted with different ones, are necessarily repeated as often as they are fitted: For different things are to be combined with different things, and the same things with many, so that all things may be shown to be harmonious with each other: and from every part of all the works of the Lord, the sweetest agreement may be drawn, with the divine spirit, the artificer of all things, inspiring (as we pray). This all-encompassing harmony we have judged capable of being embraced by three diapason canticles: hence each canticle will be completed with eight tones, that is, a perfect diapason. Therefore, in the first canticle, we shall resound the consonance of both worlds with each other, and of both with the archetype: In the second, concerning the agreement of all things with Messiah as head, and concerning the harmony that has been restored through Christ himself to all things broken and dissonant by sin: In the third, concerning man, the most harmonious bond of all things, to be recalled to harmony with all things that are bound in him, and with the Creator, with whom it is innate for him to agree, indeed, to be united: In these (unless I am mistaken) is contained the whole business of both worlds, and the sum of many disciplines. But Holy Father, and although according to the common adage all new things please, nevertheless, new things themselves often excite rivalry: they also offend eyes unaccustomed to new light, which are blinking: whence, turned to hatred, they often begin to attack what they have not yet well understood: Hence I am not unaware that I am exposed to many sharp-nosed and easily slandering individuals, both because of the new method of proceeding, and because of some sparks, long hidden under ashes, or newly struck from flint: Therefore, Most Blessed Father, this work, whatever its nature, and all other new things which we undertake with God's help, and all things that are in me, we have deemed to

--- Page 10 ---
PROLOGUE.

truly harmonious, unless by your virtue and authority it is rendered a sweet and harmless food to those who partake, for all members of the ecclesiastical body. Therefore, I have dedicated it to you, who hold the place of Christ, in whom are all things, and through whom are all things, in this Catholic body: so that just as all things receive life and beauty from Christ, the Word of God, so this work, which treats of all things, may live more successfully through you, and be beautiful, and a secure and pleasant feast for all. Farewell,
Most Holy Father, and live long.

--- Page 11 ---
INDEX OF THE HARMONIC VO-
LUME TRIPARTITE ARRANGED ACCORDING TO
its own order.

INDEX OF THE TONES OF THE FIRST CANTO.

[Decorative initial Q containing a figure] Who the progenitor of the world is, and in what harmony of supremely excellent unity it rejoices. Tone I.
By what concord the principles of things, and their describers, may agree or disagree. Tone II.
By what consonant number the highest craftsman may descend into all created things. Tone III.
By what mutual harmonies the primary kinds of things may agree with each other and with the archetype. Tone IV.
By what consonance their intervals may be filled. Tone V.
By what concord all things may be contained in man, as in a small instrument. Tone VI.
By what sonority all things, even particular ones, existing in this defiled world, may agree with the archetype. Tone VII.
What may be the ultimate, into which all diapasonic consonances are reduced. Tone VIII.

INDEX OF THE FIRST TONE.

[Decorative initial Q containing a figure] What we can learn about God from holy men illuminated by divine light, which things we discuss. Chapter I.
That without such light all who spoke concerning God erred through numerous deviations. Chapter II.
Although we cannot understand what God is, nevertheless we are taught that God exists both by oracles, and by reason, and by the consent of all. Chapter III.
How through the trace or image of created things, and their consonance with the archetype, we can arrive at the knowledge of His fecundity. Chapter IV.
That God is full of the fecundity of all things and numbers, so that He may be able to produce all things most harmoniously. Chapter V.
That God is one. Chapter VI.
That that most fecund first mind, which is called God, has produced both inwardly and outwardly. Chapter VII.

a v.

--- Page 12 ---
CANTICLES.

That God created the world. Chapter VIII.
The condition of the world does not allow philosophers to conclude against its origin. Chapter IX.
Nor does motion accomplish the same. Chapter X.
Its governors likewise provide less. Chapter XI.
Nor do they prove what they intend by proceeding from the maker. Chapter XII.
Why philosophers strayed from Catholic truth. Chapter XIII.
Reasons for the world's newness. Chapter XIV.
Why God did not make the world before, or after, Moses recounts. Chapter XV.
Philosophers fail while they strive to prove that God acts necessarily externally. Chapter XVI.
Argument for contingency in the divine work. Chapter XVII.
God knows particulars. Chapter XVIII.

SECUNDI TONI INDEX.
[Ornate woodcut initial Q] How great a dissonance the discordant wise men of the world are found to have in their doctrines. Chapter I.
That Catholic writers agree. Chapter II.
How great a dissonance the wise men of the world have cast upon its foundations. Chapter III.
Philosophers disagree even in the matter of the soul. Chapter IIII.
That they disagree no less in describing that end which all things desire. Chapter V.
Whence our writers have drawn agreement, and those others disagreement. Chapter VI.
Which teachers have proclaimed harmoniously concerning the innermost secrets in the divine and worldly instrument. Chapter VII.
Why the ancients strove to hide the doctrines which they taught under metaphors and enigmas. Chapter VIII.
How the discordant ones could be harmonized. Chapter IX.
Agreement of the wise men in the realm of the world's origin. Chapter X.
Why the number six has been assigned to creation, and the seventh day to rest. Chapter XI.
Agreement of the ancients in the unity of things. Chapter XII.
Consensus concerning the first production of things. Chapter XIII.

TERTII TONI INDEX.
How one is extended through twenty-seven. Chapter I.
Q With what order progress is made from the triune God through the ternary into all created things. Chapter II.
How angels are distributed through the first novenary corresponding to the simple ternary. Chapter III.

--- Page 13 ---
**CANTICLES.**

Just as God descends into us through the threefold order of angels, so through them we can ascend to God. Chapter 4.
Concerning the author of intelligences. Chapter 5.
How the Creator fabricated the heavens by the second square of the ternary. Chapter 6.
How planets or stars operate for good or evil in lower things. Chapter 7.
Whence evils arise, whether from the malice of influences, or from the bad disposition of the recipient. Chapter 8.
They are proven by reasons, which have already been decreed by the opinions of the wise. Chapter 9.
That neither Saturn, nor Mars, nor any other celestial body is evil, as was previously asserted. Chapter 10.
Whether stars act upon us, or not, and if they act, whether by compelling or by disposing. Chapter 11.
How the artificer of all things produced all elemental things by the third square of the ternary. Chapter 12.
Why the elements are distributed by the quaternary number. Chapter 13.
That the elements are found in all mundane members. Chapter 14.
Concerning another division of elemental things, by which objections are removed, which could be made concerning the aforesaid. Chapter 15.
That the elements are found not only in this terrestrial world, but also in the celestial, supercelestial, and archetypal. Chapter 16.
Concerning the figure of the elements according to the Pythagoreans and Platonists. Chapter 17.

**INDEX OF THE FOURTH TONE.**

[Illuminated initial Q containing a figure of a man] How angels of the first order agree with the first heaven, which is called the Prime Mover. Chapter 1.
With what harmony the Cherubim correspond to the starry heaven. Chapter 2.
The wondrous oracle of Ezekiel confirms these things. Chapter 3.
Five properties of the Thrones. Chapter 4.
With what consonance Saturn is equated with the same properties. Chapter 5.
Ten properties of the Dominations. Chapter 6.
With what harmony Jupiter imitates all the same things. Chapter 7.
Concerning the three co-equations of Mars' fire with the Virtues. Chapter 8.
How they still agree in six other conditions. Chapter 9.
The great melody of the Sun agreeing in eight with the Powers renders almost an octave. Chapter 10.
The Principalities participate in five with Venus. Chapter 11.
With what song Mercury sings in harmony with the Archangels. Chapter 12.

--- Page 14 ---
I N D E X

How the moon is finally harmonized with angels. Chapter XIII.
Again, the earth harmonizes with the moon. Chapter XIV.
Water resonates with Mercury and Saturn. Chapter XV.
Air re-echoes with Jupiter and Venus. Chapter XVI.
Fire glows with the Sun and Mars. Chapter XVII.
Stones resonate with the heavens. Chapter XVIII.
Metals do the same, especially with Mars. Chapter XIX.
Plants respond to the heavens with a more lively sound, especially to Jupiter. Chapter XX.
Zoophytes chant in harmony with Saturn. Chapter XXI.
Animals sing in harmony with the starry heaven and the Prime Mover. Chapter XXII.
The same (animals) resonate especially with the supracelestial world. Chapter XXIII.
What things in particular harmonize with Saturn. Chapter XXIV.
What things harmonize with Jupiter. Chapter XXV.
What things receive strength from Mars. Chapter XXVI.
What things sing in harmony with the Sun or Phoebus. Chapter XXVII.
What things are delighted with Venus. Chapter XXVIII.
What things resonate with Mercury. Chapter XXIX.
How all these things, with the moon, bring about a complete consonance of harmony. Chapter XXX.
What things in particular resonate with certain particular stars. Chapter XXXI.
How beautifully all these things are depicted in the ark, which Moses fashioned by divine command. Chapter XXXII.
With what great mystery all enneads converge in their tenth. Chapter XXXIII.

Q V I N T I T O N I I N D E X.

[Decorative initial C] Why that first description is made by Plato by the twenty-seventh number. Chapter I.
What intervals of the same number can be filled, and what cannot. Chapter II.
Why this arrangement is reduced to larger numbers. Chapter III.
Why it is again reduced to the largest numbers. Chapter IV.
Why in this kind of description Plato used the diatonic genus more than the chromatic and enharmonic. Chapter V.
By what wonderful artifice, in the first of all creatures, which the Hebrews call Metatron, are contained those three nines which, namely, complete their cube, 27. Chapter VI.
That the same number, and in the same order, is contained in higher things by a certain superexcellent virtue. Chapter VII.

--- Page 15 ---
CANTICLES.

That from the unity of the first, harmony results in all things. Chapter VIII.
By what note the heptachord inscribed in the soul corresponds. Chapter IX.
How those three enneads are found in man. Chapter X.
What those three proportions—musical, geometrical, and arithmetical—by which the soul and the whole world are ordered, signify. Chapter XI.
Why the Pythagoreans and Academics encompass the matter of the world and the soul with seven limits. Chapter XII.
How all things in the world, speaking in the Platonic manner, are filled with the intervals of their limits. Chapter XIII.
That those things which have been said concerning things existing in the spheres seem to agree with sacred scripture. Chapter XIV.
What can be said concerning the completions of the intervals of the three enneads. Chapter XV.
How all things have been constituted by their own number, weight, and measure. Chapter XVI.
By what intervening causes these manifold kinds are brought together. Chapter XVII.
How all those three enneads are moreover contained in the supreme name of God and emanate from Him. Chapter XVIII.

**INDEX OF THE SIXTH TONE.**

[Decorative woodcut initial D] Concerning the method of proceeding, and the general harmony of man with the greater world and the archetype. Chapter I.
That man imitates the world in circular form. Chapter II.
Concerning the proportion of measures in man. Chapter III.
The harmony of his members and features with each other. Chapter IV.
That all things are included in man: a general discourse. Chapter V.
With what elegance the elements are found in this man. Chapter VI.
What things in man himself correspond to the elements. Chapter VII.
Among composite things, with which stones correspond. Chapter VIII.
To what things metals correspond. Chapter IX.
With what things certain mixed minerals harmonize by wondrous artifice. Chapter X.
With what things the planets grow green and vegetate. Chapter XI.
That animal conditions live in man is clear to all. Chapter XII.
What the ancients thought concerning the transmigration of the human soul into beasts, and what is the truth of the matter. Chapter XIII.
What foreigners have set forth concerning particular transmutations, with wondrous harmony with our own. Chapter XIV.
Moses describes by sacred artifice how all things are contained in man in

--- Page 16 ---
<meta>This page continues the thematic index of a work exploring the "microcosm" theory—the idea that the human being contains the entire universe within themselves. The previous sections likely dealt with the physical elements, while this section focuses on celestial and archetypal correspondences.</meta>

# INDEX

Noah’s Ark. Chapter XV.
Why the unclean animals are said to have been brought into the Ark in pairs of each sex, but the clean animals in sevens. Chapter XVI.
That all the heavens are also contained within man. Chapter XVII.
From where each of the signs of the zodiac <term>zodiac: the belt of twelve constellations through which the sun passes</term> receives its name, and what those animals from which they are named do in relation to the sun. Chapter XVIII.
Why those signs and the principal joints in man are distributed in the number of twelve. Chapter XIX.
The correspondence of qualities with the planets and the eighth heaven <note>The "eighth heaven" refers to the sphere of the fixed stars, located beyond the seven planetary spheres in classical astronomy.</note>. Chapter XX.
That the intellect corresponds with the circle of the zodiac signs. Chapter XXI.
The "First Mover" <term>Primum Mobile: the outermost moving sphere in the geocentric model which drives all other spheres</term> carries along the heart, or the freedom of the soul residing there. Chapter XXII.
Which things are compressed and solidified with Saturn. Chapter XXIII.
Which things are balanced with Jupiter. Chapter XXIV.
Which things burn with Mars. Chapter XXV.
Which things are quickened and made bright with the Sun. Chapter XXVI.
Which things are softened with Venus. Chapter XXVII.
Which things are sharpened and penetrate with Mercury. Chapter XXVIII.
Which things are driven by the Moon. Chapter XXIX.
That from the proportion of the motions of the planets to one another and to the eighth heaven, the proportion of our own inner powers is suggested. Chapter XXX.
Concerning the admirable harmony of disordered things and of both worlds <note>The "two worlds" are the Macrocosm (the universe) and the Microcosm (man).</note> with themselves. Chapter XXXI.
That man harmonizes with the angels, containing them within himself. Chapter XXXII.
Man makes music with God, existing as His temple and image. Chapter XXXIII.
Concerning the consonance of the members of God and man. Chapter XXXIV.

## INDEX OF THE SEVENTH TONE

<image-desc>A decorative square woodcut drop cap 'A' featuring a central figure surrounded by scrolling foliage and architectural details.</image-desc>
By authorities and reasons, it is proven that all things have something in the archetype <term>archetype: the original divine pattern or "blueprint" in the mind of God</term> to which they correspond. Chapter I.
To which Majesty "Prime Matter" <term>materia prima: the formless, fundamental substance of the universe before it is shaped</term> acts as an accompaniment. Chapter II.
With what the earth is established. Chapter III.
With which things the other elements resonate in the same place. Chapter IV.
What stones signify therein. Chapter V.
What seat the metals have there. Chapter VI.
What place the plants have in that same spot. Chapter VII.
With which things this plain of ours is made equal. Chapter VIII.

<summary>This index page outlines chapters exploring the mystical correspondences between the human body, the planetary spheres, and the divine archetypes. It emphasizes the "Harmony of the Spheres" and the concept of man as a mirror of the entire cosmos.</summary>
<keywords>Noah's Ark, Zodiac, Astrology, Planetary influence, Microcosm, Macrocosm, Prime Matter, Celestial Harmony, Human Intellect, Archetypes</keywords>

--- Page 17 ---
CANTICLES.

By what the mountains are raised. Chap. IX.
What the desert, and the dry land. Chap. X.
What the fruitful earth. Chap. XI.
What the sea and the waters. Chap. XII.
What the fountains. Chap. XIII.
What the rivers, and canals. Chap. XIIII.
What the pools, lakes, and ponds. Chap. XV.
What the Red Sea. Chap. XVI.
What the clouds, and rain. Chap. XVII.
What the dew, and frost. Chap. XVIII.
What the hail, and snow. Chap. XIX.
What the ice, and crystal. Chap. XX.
What the paradise of delight. Chap. XXI.
What Gihon, Pishon, Tigris, and Euphrates flowing from that very para-
dise. Chap. XXII.
What the Jordan, and the Nile river of Egypt. Chap. XXIII.
What wine, milk, butter, and honey. Chap. XXIIII.
What the land flowing with milk and honey. Chap. XXV.
What oil. Chap. XXVI.
What the palm, cedar, shittim wood, and hyssop, and the wil-
low. Chap. XXVII.
What the vine, and the vineyard. Chap. XXVIII.
What the animals of holiness. Chap. XXIX.
What the wild goats, stags, and fawns. Chap. XXX.
What the sheep, and shepherds of sheep. Chap. XXXI.
What the clean and unclean animals, fish, birds, and plants. Chap. XXXII.
What Jerusalem, Zion, and the temple. Chap. XXXIII.
What Egypt, Babylon, and Damascus. Chap. XXXIIII.
What Arabia, Mount Sinai, and Mesopotamia of Syria. Chap. XXXV.
What Amalek, Moab, Ammon, and the Philistines. Chap. XXXVI.

INDEX OF THE EIGHTH TONE.

[Illuminated initial 'D' containing a figure] GOD completes all things with breath, and most sweet life. Chap. I.
Who this is, who completes all things, and what we can know about him. Chap. II.
All things truly tend towards God. Chap. III.
With what desire they proceed into the same. Chap. IIII.
By what course they are carried. Chap. V.

--- Page 18 ---
INDEX

By whom this chariot is drawn. Chapter VI.
What the angelic ministers of God accomplish in this drawing, is confirmed from sacred scripture. Chapter VII.
How all things proceed from God through the number six. Chapter VIII.
How through the number six they return to the same, and especially into Christ, who is true rest and true Sabbath. Chapter IX.
How the human race is led back into God himself through the six ages. Chapter X.
How an individual man living regularly comes into Christ the Sabbath through six ages signified by those six days. Chapter XI.
Christ is true rest and true Sabbath. Chapter XII.
Why, the works of five days having been completed, it was said, "God saw that it was good," but the work of the sixth having been completed, it was said, "and they were very good." Chapter XIII.
The perfect octave is completed in the number eight. Chapter XIV.
How the heavens in their revolution perfectly produce the octave. Chapter XV.
Concerning the harmony of the heavens both from distance and from the consonance of movements. Chapter XVI.
Concerning the harmonious fruitfulness in the septenary number of the planets. Chapter XVII.
Concerning the harmonious correspondence of the seven planets with the twelve signs. Chapter XVIII.
Concerning the true harmony of the heavens, which some, not understanding, falsely deny. Chapter XIX.
Concerning the concord of the heavens with the supernal minds. Chapter XX.
All things lead into the same, because from the same they receive whence they flow, although the influx may seem diverse. Chapter XXI.

[manicule] Preface to the Second Canticle.
INDEX OF THE TONES OF THE SECOND CANTICLE.

[Decorative initial C containing a figure] CHRIST, and Messiah, is the wisdom of God, and the Word containing all things by ideal reason, and existing as man, actually embracing all lower things. Tone I.
Christ is the life and sustenance of all things, vivifying all things, and drawing all things to himself. Tone II.
Christ is the true priest, true bread, host, and sacrifice, purifying all things, and pacifying all things. Tone III.
Christ is the highest truth, and the light teaching all, and illuminating all things. Tone IV.
Christ, made Father of all through true regeneration, and head of the mystical body, flows into all members. Tone V.

--- Page 19 ---
OF THE CANTICLES.

Christ is the end, and the fulfillment of all works, giving to all
that they may work.                                                              Ton. VI.
Christ is King of kings, and supreme Emperor, ruling
and moderating all things.                                                              Ton. VII.
Christ is the mediator, through whom passage is given to all, that
they may reach their end.                                                         Ton. VIII.

INDEX OF THE FIRST TONE.

[Decorative initial M] Essiah's divinity is proven by arguments.      Chapter I.
The same is proven by prophecies.                                                   Chapter II.
How divinity and the Word are in Christ himself,
                                                                                          Chapter III.
In the divine Word all things were contained.                                     Chapter IV.
Therein all things are by number, weight, and measure.                  Chapter V.
Exemplary cognitions in the mind of the supreme artisan are called
ideas, and are.                                                                                Chapter VI.
Who have admitted these ideas.                                                          Chapter VII.
Who have rejected ideas, and for what reasons.                               Chapter VIII.
They are errors, and not reasons, which seem to act against them.    Chapter IX.
What we have from ideas.                                                           Chapter X.
That all harmony proceeds from the Word.                                 Chapter XI.
How these ideas are understood by us.                               Chapter XII.
The necessity of things, and all being, depends on ideas.                 Chapter XIII.
Therein are also ideas of virtues, and rules, according to which
we ought to live.                                                                  Chapter XIV.
There are principles moderating honest and base actions.      Chapter XV.
Christ is true man, full of divinity.                              Chapter XVI.
Just as Christ, in that he is God, contains all things by virtue: so
in that he is man, he contains all the same things collected in the same most
excellent mark.                                                            Chapter XVII.

INDEX OF THE SECOND TONE.

The life of all is manifold and unique.                                           Chapter I.
[Decorative initial M] Hence all things derive life.                                              Chapter II.
What the tree of life is.                                                                   Chapter III.
Where this tree is planted.                                                        Chapter IV.
How the tree itself is formed.                                                 Chapter V.
To whom, and how communicated.                                          Chapter VI.
When, and why the tree was forbidden.                                                 Chapter VII.
                                                                                                   b

--- Page 20 ---
INDEX

How all things live in that tree, and consequently in Christ. Cap. VIII.
Christ is the support of all things.                 Cap. IX.
Why not all are supported by him.                  Cap. X.
How he was exalted from the earth.                  Cap. XI.
How, having been exalted, he drew all things to himself.      Cap. XII.
How virtues and divine powers seemed diffused into many things. Cap. XIII.
Christ, freeing the human race from this calamity, cast down that three-headed
   beast.                                         Cap. XIIII.
How he summoned all other divine powers to himself.       Cap. XV.
This dominion obtained, and the attraction of all divine powers to himself, are proven by an evident
   fact.                                   Cap. XVI.
The same things are confirmed by prophecies.                     Cap. XVII.
How he will finally remove all distracting things, so that he may completely draw all things to himself
   alone.                                     Cap. XVIII.
That he will finally draw all who are to be drawn.              Cap. XIX.

INDEX OF THE THIRD TONE.
   The nature of a priest and his office.              Cap. primum.
That Christ was a true priest, and endowed with all things
   which pertain to a true priest and a supreme
pontiff.                               Cap. II.
To Christ, as a true priest, all priestly things are
   due.                                           Cap. III.
What the priest's vestments are.                   Cap. IIII.
What these vestments contribute to priests, and to the greatest
   prelate.                                  Cap. V.
What these figurative garments pertain to the priests of
   Christ.                                         Cap. VI.
What all those vestments (have) with Christ, whom they especially
   symbolized.                                      Cap. VII.
Christ is a priest forever.                 Cap. VIII.
Why Christ was a priest by oath.          Cap. IX.
How Christ was a priest according to the order of Mel-
   chizedek.                                      Cap. X.
How much greater and better a priest Christ was than
   Aaron and all legal priests.              Cap. XI.
Christ was a true victim, and an all-encompassing sacrifice, and an
   offering.                                         Cap. XII.
How Christ was a true lamb.               Cap. XIII.
Concerning the rod of Moses and the cross.                            Cap. XIIII.

--- Page 21 ---
CANTICLES.
To what purpose sacrifices, and why goats perhaps chosen were commanded to be offered for sin. Cap. XV.
Why a pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons, were commanded to be offered in the purification of childbirth and of a woman giving birth. Cap. XVI.
Why two birds were offered for cleansing a leper. Cap. XVII.
Why together with a goat a calf or an ox was offered for sin. Cap. XVIII.
What of the sheep, and the lamb. Cap. XIX.
What of the showbread, unleavened cake, wafers, similar breads, and such things anointed with oil. Cap. XX.
What of the censer, or thurible, frankincense, and incensing. Cap. XXI.

INDEX OF THE FOURTH TONE.

[Decorative woodcut initial Q containing a figure] What truth is. Cap. I.
Christ is truth. Cap. II.
Christ is the truth of the law. Cap. III.
How not one jot, or one tittle of the law passes away without being fulfilled, and without being verified in Christ. Cap. IIII.
Christ perfected the law. Cap. V.
What the red heifer, and its ashes in sacred rites, and in expiation mean.

--- Page 22 ---
I N D E X

Whence the likeness perfecting the image of the begetter in the begotten. Chap. V.
How Christ feeds all whom he begets. Chap. VI.
How, in order to remove nausea, he cooked these foods. Chap. VII.
He who begot and feeds us, also instructs us like a good father. Chap. VIII.
What doctrine he taught us. Chap. IX.
A brief epilogue of those things which Christ taught concerning the affair of man-
     kind. Chap. X.
In what school and from what chair he instructed us. Chap. XI.
With what treasures, like a good father, Christ might enrich us. Chap. XII.
With what private property he enriched his daughters. Chap. XIII.
What legacy he finally made. Chap. XIV.
To whom, and how much, he bequeathed. Chap. XV.
With what great solemnity he celebrated this testament. Chap. XVI.
How the testament was confirmed. Chap. XVII.
How Christ became not only father, but head of all
     things. Chap. XVIII.
How Christ, as a true head, flows into all members. Chap. XIX.
What great care Christ, our parent, has for us, the children whom he begot, in

--- Page 23 ---
CANTICLES.
INDEX OF THE SEVENTH TONE.

**[Large decorative initial C]** HAT Christ is the true Lord was foretold by Mosaic prophecies. Chapter 1.
The same is confirmed by other prophecies. Chapter 2.
Why Christ is not said to reign in the house of Abraham, although the promise concerning him was first made to Abraham himself. Chapter 3.
Why he does not even reign in the house of Isaac, to whom the promise was made a second time. Chapter 4.
Why it was said by an angelic oracle, "Jesus will reign in the house of Jacob forever." Chapter 5.
Concerning the fruits of this house, in which Christ reigns. Chapter 6.
What this house is, according to allegory. Chapter 7.
With what great harmony those apostolic tribes were distributed according to the figurative division, and the signs of the starry heaven. Chapter 8.
By what distribution, and by what mystery, each family and tribe pitched camps for the aspects of the heavens. Chapter 9.
Into how many trigons the heavens are divided, and to which trigon, or sign, each region is subject. Chapter 10.
In which provinces, and to which subject signs, each Apostle preached. Chapter 11.
Concerning the correspondence of the Apostles with the celestial signs. Chapter 12.
The tribes also correspond with the images, at whose aspects they encamped. Chapter 13.
Concerning the harmony of the blessings which Jacob gave to his twelve sons with the twelve peoples, to whom the twelve Apostles preached according to the order of the signs to which they correspond. Chapter 14.
Digression, why the primary order will not be observed. Chapter 15.
Continuation of the harmony of the blessings of Issachar and Zebulun with their peoples. Chapter 16.
Concerning the harmony of the blessing given to Judah with the people directed by the sign corresponding to him. Chapter 17.
Concerning the harmony of the blessings of the other two tribes of this trigon, with the signs and peoples corresponding to them. Chapter 18.
Concerning the harmony of the blessings of the three families who pitched camps against the third trigon, with the peoples directed by it. Chapter 19.
Concerning the harmony of the blessings of the remaining tribes who encamped against the fourth trigon, with the peoples directed by it. Chapter 20.
Digression, why no particular tribe or region was assigned to Paul, the most famous Apostle. Chapter 21.
b iij

--- Page 24 ---
**INDEX**

What is signified by that intervening three-fold company in the encampment around the *tabernacle of the covenant*. Chapter 22.
What is intimated by the seventy-two disciples, whom our Lord Jesus is said to have chosen in the Gospel. Chapter 23.
That Christ rules and governs the whole mystical and worldly body. Chapter 24.
This is explained by an oracle. Chapter 25.

**INDEX OF THE EIGHTH TONE.**

[Decorative initial C] Hrist in the Most Holy Trinity is the middle person. Chapter 1.
Christ is the true tree, placed in the middle of paradise. Chapter 2.
What this divine middle person [is] with the human nature which he assumed. Chapter 3.
How sin and evil were introduced into the world from that tree. Chapter 4.
Christ in this life was always delighted in the middle. Chapter 5.
Christ was the best mediator. Chapter 6.
Through Christ the man we ascend to God and the Father. Chapter 7.
How, according to the Apostle's teaching, Christ is the mediator of the New Testament. Chapter 8.
Digression concerning the war declared by the ancient Fathers against those peoples. Chapter 9.
Whether we need a mediator so that we may come to this Christ the redeemer. Chapter 10.

❧ Proem to the third and last canticle.
**INDEX OF THE TONES OF THE THIRD CANTICLE.**

[Decorative initial D] Ealing with the manifold harmony of the soul, and the body, and the virtues. First Tone.
Concerning the soul's consonance through the intelligences of things. Tone 2.
Concerning man's harmony with intelligences, heavens, and sacred things. Tone 3.
Concerning the harmony of all things with man well-tuned, so that he may be able to operate in all things, and command all things. Tone 4.
Concerning the soul's consonance with its own spirit, and with all other spirits. Tone 5.
Concerning the sweetest harmony which well-tuned men make with God. Tone 6.
Concerning the harmony of the body and the soul changed for the better by re-

--- Page 25 ---
CANTICORVM.

Concerning the harmony of body and soul changed for the better through resurrection. ................................................................................. Tone VII.
Concerning the most sweet harmonies, and that eternal rest in acquired blessedness. ................................................................................. Tone VIII.

INDEX OF THE FIRST TONE.
[Decorative initial D] Concerning that harmony and symmetry which is in the body. Chapter I.
Concerning that consonance which is between body and soul. Chapter II.
Whence dissonance arises in the body. Chapter III.
Whence, and what consonance or dissonance (is) between body and soul. Chapter IV.
Concerning the tempering of the body, and the disposition of the tentorium through natural remedies. Chapter V.
How much prudence and due regimen contribute to bringing about such temperaments. Chapter VI.
How much the true knowledge of oneself avails to each for bringing about these things. Chapter VII.
The body is tempered and strengthened, and consequently the whole person, by heavenly favor. Chapter VIII.
By what short path we can draw favor from heaven, angels, and God. Chapter IX.
How man, the microcosm, can receive nourishment from all members of the greater world (to which he is most similar). Chapter X.
Concerning the soul's agreement with itself. Chapter XI.
Concerning bringing about a harmony of virtues, so that the soul can be healed and delighted by them. Chapter XII.
Concerning the consonance of virtues with the soul. Chapter XIII.

INDEX OF THE SECOND TONE.
[Decorative initial Q] What the soul is. Chapter I.
Whether the Creator made all souls equal. Chapter II.
Why the most just judge used this inequality in the primal distribution. Chapter III.
Whether from this, that he distributed in unequal degrees from the beginning, and pursues mortals with various gifts and rewards, the Creator is considered a respecter of persons. Chapter IV.
Solution of some difficulties. Chapter V.
How the soul is naked from the beginning, or appears. Chapter VI.
To what degree of intelligence the soul can attain. Chapter VII.
Whether the intellect always reaches that to which it could reach. Chapter VIII.
By what means we can attain the degree of knowledge prepared for us. Chapter IX.
Whether one must proceed through external senses, so that to it one may be led-
b iiij

--- Page 26 ---
                                INDEX
...we may reach the goal.                               Chap. X.
That the interior senses are true and necessary, by which more and more certainly can be perceived
  than by exterior senses.                              Chap. XI.
Whether man always uses these interior senses.          Chap. XII.

                INDEX OF THE THIRD TONE.

[Decorative initial Q] What symbol, and what agreement man has
                       with angels.                     Chap. I.
                       Whether man is superior to angels, or the contrary. Chap. II. :
                       What envy there has been, and is, between angels, and
  men.                                                  Chap. III.
Whether men agree with angels in number.                Chap. IIII.
With what most just balance He has sent forth against us as enemies those who transgressed from among them.
                                                        Chap. V.
What man can receive from the heavens, that he may become better.
                                                        Chap. VI.
Whence the heavens receive the favor which they harmonically infuse. Chap. VII.
What man has with the sacraments.                       Chap. VIII.
What man has with the sacrifices.                       Chap. IX.

                INDEX OF THE FOURTH TONE.

[Decorative initial D] Concerning a certain hidden agreement of things among themselves, whence one
                       wonderfully operates upon another. Chap. I.
                       Those things which agree among themselves, much more happily meet in man,
                       who is the most perfect bond of all, and supported by divinity
  above all things.                                     Chap. II.
That man, well-attuned, is sometimes made a prophet by the manifold support of
  lower things.                                         Chap. III.
Who, and whence a true prophet is made.                 Chap. IIII.
An Apology for Prophecy.                                Chap. V.
Well-attuned men lead all things to themselves.         Chap. VI.
Men placed in their proper place, and harmonized, easily dominate all
  things.                                               Chap. VII.
Whence this power of dominating comes, how it was lost, and how
  it was restored.                                      Chap. VIII.
The various and wonderful condition of operating and dominating. Chap. IX.
What are natural works, what are false, and what are true miracles, and what is the legitimate
  power of dominating.                                  Chap. X.
Man, well-attuned, is heard in his prayers concerning whatever thing he asks.

--- Page 27 ---
OF CANTICLES.

sought.                                                                          Chap. XI.
Only a well-tuned man lives at ease with God.      Chap. XII.

INDEX OF THE FIFTH TONE.

[Decorative initial Q] What the spirit is.                                       Chap. I.
How manifold the spirit is.                                                         Chap. II.
What the spirit does in man beyond the soul.                      Chap. III.
What agreement man has with the Spirit of
God.                                                                          Chap. IIII.
What commerce man has with the angelic spirit.      Chap. V.
What man has with the diabolical spirit.                         Chap. VI.
How the spirit of one is understood to enter into the body of another.      Chap. VII.
What harmony is derived between spirit and soul.      Chap. VIII.

INDEX OF THE SIXTH TONE.

[Decorative initial H] Man by nature emulates God.                   Chap. I.
Man portrays the archetype in figure.                                     Chap. II.
The body suits God clothed no less than Him naked, and responds to the simplest, pure, and unadorned matter (as we have said).                                                                            Chap. III.
Since in man there are the lowest and the highest, and also the intermediate, all things are easily reconciled with God through man himself.                               Chap. IIII.
Why the soul has been placed in the body, as if in a melting pot to be purified.                                                                      Chap. V.
Why God has placed here the soul and the changeable mind.  Chap. VI.
How man is estranged from God by sin.                         Chap. VII.
Just as man through sin falls away from God and is estranged, so through penitence he is brought back and tempered.                                                        Chap. VIII.
By the sacraments man is rendered more perfect in himself, and more resonant with God.                                                              Chap. IX.
By sacrifices he is expiated.                                                         Chap. X.
By alms he is cleansed.                                                      Chap. XI.
He resounds with virtues.                                                        Chap. XII.
By reading he imbibes, from which he can modulate.                           Chap. XIII.
By meditation he preludes.                                                     Chap. XIIII.
By prayer he modulates.                                                       Chap. XV.
By contemplation he is introduced.                                          Chap. XVI.
By love he is united.                                                                Chap. XVII.
By ecstasy and rapture he is transmuted.                                      Chap. XVIII.

--- Page 28 ---
INDEX
INDEX OF THE SEVENTH TONE.

[Decorated initial A] S to whether resurrection is possible. Chapter 1.
As to whether it has been, and whether it will be in the future. Chapter 2.
As to whether the future resurrection can be proven by reasons. Chapter 3.
Who first gave access to resurrection, and how appropriately. Chapter 4.
What we have revealed about resurrection from sacred writings. Chapter 5.
If it can be known by some conjecture when this resurrection will be. Chapter 6.
By whose power resurrection is brought about. Chapter 7.
What the angelic voice and God's trumpet are. Chapter 8.
What change of bodies will be. Chapter 9.
Who are to be changed, and who are not, and why. Chapter 10.
With what flesh, and with what body, the sleeping ones are to be raised. Chapter 11.
What hair will not perish. Chapter 12.
With what members we shall rejoice. Chapter 13.
By what fire the good are to be refined. Chapter 14.
By what particular fire the wicked are to be burned. Chapter 15.
How the wicked are to be tormented. Chapter 16.
Resolution of the difficulty concerning this fire. Chapter 17.

INDEX OF THE MODES AND CON-
CEPTS OF THE EIGHTH TONE.
Module 1. Subject.
[Decorated initial V] HY that city is said to be built of gold. Concept 1.
Why the walls are of jasper. Concept 2.
What the twelve stones in the foundation signify. Concept 3.
Digression on whence stones derive their power. Concept 4.
What is the true material of the heavenly city. Concept 5.
Module 2. Arrangement.
On the general division of Ezekiel and John. Concept 1.
Why this city is placed in a square. Concept 2.
On the gates of the same city. Concept 3.
What streets are there. Concept 4.
Module 3. Measurements.
On the particular measurement according to Ezekiel. Concept 1.
On the measurement of firstfruits, or tithes. Concept 2.
On the measurement of the city according to John. Concept 3.

--- Page 29 ---
OF THE SONG OF SONGS.

Modulus IIII. Structure.
Who built it.                                                                 Con. I.
How, and with what glue it was joined and united.                        Con. II.
Why the names of the Apostles, and of the tribes, are engraved in the foundation, and the names
of angels in the gates.                                                            Con. III.

Modulus. V. Adornment.
Typical description of the adornment according to Ezekiel.                      Con. I.
Why John does not express the adornment, as Ezekiel does.                   Con. II.

Modulus. V I. Light.
What light is in general.                                                            Con. I.
What generated light is.                                                                 Con. II.
How all created things proceed from light.                               Con. III.
How light illuminates.                                                            Con. IIII.
How light itself kindles, and excites.                                     Con. V.
How this light amplifies, and expands.                                     Con. VI.
How this light gladdens, and beatifies.                                   Con. VII.

Modulus. V I I. Division.
That this heavenly house, and family is divided.                        Con. I.
Concerning the particular mansions, and seats of the blessed.               Con. II.
Concerning the Merkavah, or the tribunal of God according to the Hebrews.                 Con. III.

Modulus. V I I I. Guests.
How many guests there are in that city.                                             Con. I.
Concerning angelic guests.                                                          Con. II.
Concerning human guests.                                                          Con. III.
Concerning divine guests.                                                             Cap. IIII.

Modulus. I X. Espousals.
Where, and when the marriage between God, and the soul was initiated.        Con. I.
How it was contracted.                                                  Con. II.
How it was ratified.                                                               Con. III.
How it was consummated.                                                       Con. IIII.

Modulus. X. Sustenance.
What bread is prepared in this banquet.                                     Con. I.
That it is one.                                                                           Con. II.
What bread, and what flesh.                                                         Cap. III.
What are the fruits of this banquet.                                                    Con. IIII.
What abundance, and sweetness of foods.                                              Con. V.

Modulus. X I. Instruments.
Concerning the first instrument, which is the globe of the heavens.                     Con. I.
Concerning the second instrument, which is the human tongue.                    Cap. II.
Concerning the third instrument, which is our body.                       Con. III.

--- Page 30 ---
INDEX
*About the fourth instrument, namely the angelic tongue.* Con. IIII.
*About the angelic minds, and of the blessed, which themselves are also resonant instruments.* Con. V.
*About the breath providing sound to all these instruments, which is the Holy Spirit and the Divine Word.* Con. VI.
*What those instruments mentioned in the Davidic hymns mean.* Con. VII.
                        Modulus. XII. Epithalamiums.
*Who may sing epithalamiums.* Con. first.
*Epithalamium for the bride.* Con. II.
*Epithalamium for the groom.* Con. III.
*Epithalamium for the marriage.* Con. IIII.
                        Modulus. XIII. Triumph.
*What a just battle is.* Con. first.
*About the most ample victory obtained by Christ through himself, and through his soldiers.* Con. II.
*The Glory of the Triumph of the Emperor and of the soldiers.* Con. III.
*About the triumph of various leaders after Christ's departure.* Con. IIII.
                        Modulus. XIV. Reward.
*How great and precious is the reward of those fighting.* Con. first.
*That that reward is pleasant and eternal.* Con. II.
                        Modulus. XV. Dominion.
*About the ample dominion of the prince.* Con. first.
*How just is the dominion of that prince.* Con. II.
*About the kingdom of fellow soldiers.* Con. III.
                        Modulus. XVI. Peace.
*What peace is.* Con. first.
*By whom peace is given.* Con. II.
*How sweet and harmonious peace itself is.* Con. III.
                        Modulus. XVII. Union.
*About the union of the blessed with God.* Con. Sole.
                        Modulus. XVIII. Happiness.
*Who is happy and blessed.* Con. first.
*In what happiness consists.* Con. II.
*To whom perfect happiness is given.* Con. III.
                        Modulus. XIX. All Good.
*What is good, which is called the true and highest good.* Con. Sole.
                        Modulus. XX. Silence.
*About rest, quiet, and silence, to which one arrives once the good towards which we strive has been obtained.* Con. first.
*A hymn to be offered in silence to God alone with a pure and elevated mind.* Con. II.

--- Page 31 ---
A MOST NECESSARY INDEX of those things
which could be gathered from the vast collection of the entire work, never before
published. In which the number placed first
indicates the folio. But the other shows the chapter
in which the summary is contained.

A
[Decorative initial A] Aaron signifies skill in sacrificing
in the law. 243.18
Aaron indeed wrote concerning the virtues
of stones.
folio 80. chapter .28
Abaddon, how it is interpreted. 309.12
Therefore, just as we do not proceed from art
to nature, so neither should we proceed from nature to God
by arguing. 11.9
One should not argue from art to nature
thus: Art presupposes a composite, gold;
the coppersmith [presupposes] bronze and metal;
therefore, a natural agent also presupposes a composite.
For art imitates nature, not the other way around.
Whence philosophers thus err, thinking that God presupposes
a subject, as a natural agent does. 11.9
To come from the South is with the light of truth,
and with grace, and mercy. 133.8
Abraham, father of faith, bears the image of the great father,
how it is to be understood. 299.3
Abraham, how he is interpreted. 299.3
Abraham, why he rode donkeys. 419.3
Abraham, where he learned Astronomy. 318.20
Abraham, what he taught the Egyptians. 2.1
Abraham justified, because not in his own
merits, nor in himself, nor in the works
of the law. 263.14
Abraham was previously called Abram. 429.3
Abraham had a domestic angel,
Zadchiel. 363.1
Abraham was cast into the furnace by the

Chaldeans. 7.6
Abraham in the book concerning formation, what concerning
ten. 191.5
Abraham suffered many things from the Chaldeans.
folio 173.10
Abraham published the book concerning formation.
folio 50.12
Abraham was the first to be called Hebrew in the sacred scriptures,
and is called from 'habar', which
means 'to pass over'. 447.2
Asclepiades, having rejected all medicines,
professed five things as common aids. 340.6
Death swallowed up in victory, a beautiful
exposition. 404.4
Abstinence of many prudent men,
what kind. 340.6
Academics acknowledge other dwelling places than in this
world for those deserving well or ill. 273.10
Academics transferred many things from Mosaic teachings
into their philosophy. 3.1
Academics, beyond the Peripatetics, add something
divine to human reason. 272.10
Academics (especially Proclus) most sacredly
teach the union of all things. 190.5
Academics say that demons are corporeal.
folio 412.16
Divine Academics. 57.2
All Academics establish the soul of the world. 264.6
Agreement of the Academics with the Peripatetics
concerning the harmony of the revolving heavens. 180.19
c

--- Page 32 ---
INDEX

**[Left Column]**

Plato, chief of the Academics 35.11
Opinion of the Academics concerning stones. folio 420.4
Great harmony of the Academics and Catholics almost everywhere 57.2
Harmonies received through divine oracles are taken up with a pure, joyful, and festive mind 9.8
Who is a respecter of persons? 352.4
All accidents rest upon substance. folio 167.3
Achephuaros, king of the Persians 315.18
Pungent things having mixed sweetness, dedicated to the Sun 79.27
Actions are of supposits and particulars 189.3
What are active exemplars? 56.1
All things are generated by active and passive. folio 90.9
Adam's transgression, a sin as if against the Holy Spirit 185.1
Adad in the Assyrian language signifies the sun. 74.17
Adam is written with three letters among the Hebrews: the first, Aleph, which (signifies) divinity; the second, Daleth, which (signifies) celestial nature; the third, Mem, which (signifies) the corruptible body. 103.5
Adam fallen, Abraham perfected. 429.3
Adam clothed in skin after sin, with great mystery 136.1
Adam familiar with the angel Raziel. folio 363.1
Diamond is prized among the rich of the world, but is rejected by divine men. folio 418.3
From the best God proceeds good and evil 143.18
Adonai Elohim formed man, dust from the earth 97.17
What is Adonai Sabaoth? 182.21

**[Right Column]**

Why is Adonai called the Standard-bearer? 333.9.
Adonai belongs to Christ 455.3.
Air is not counted (by Abraham the author in the book On Formation) among the elements 129.4
Air, by the Hebrews, (is) the spirit containing and joining the other elements 204.6
Air resounds with Jupiter and Venus. 73.16
Air is not an element, but as it were the medium, glue, and bond of the elements. folio 129.4
Air, not as matter, but as a glue and spirit connecting the other three elements. 129.4
Air signifies the subtle spirit of God 68.11
Air has so much life that not even for a moment of time can any animal live without it; therefore, the Hebrews often call it spirit, because it is most vital. 204.6
The figure of Air, from eight bases, and six solid angles, and twenty-four planes. folio 54.17
From whom the Egyptians (received) medicine 18.14
Egyptians opulent with gold and silver 75.19
Egyptians taught letters by the Assyrians. 2.1
Egyptians worship Io the Goddess 2.1
Egyptians constructed such statues of the Gods that they might speak 379.9
Egypt, Babylon, and Damascus, what? folio 159.34
Egypt retains the figure of a delta, enclosed by the Nile 149.22
What irrigated Egypt signifies. folio 137.11
Aemilius, what (he says) about John's Gospel. folio 190.4
Some say the Chalybes, others the Cyclopes, invented the bronze-working craft 19.14
Aesculus, skilled in astronomy 21.16

--- Page 33 ---
MATERIÆ.

| Left Column | Right Column |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 34 ---
INDEX

algendum quare eſt nobis 355.6
alienum eſſe ab officio boni uiri arcana
diuina propalare Mercurius aſſerit.
folio 467.1.
aliud eſt quærere unum, & tendere in
unum, quàm effici unum 461.1
Alleluia laudate Iah ſignificat. 83.32
alleluia quare tempore pœnitentiæ non
dicitur, quod interpretatũ eſt, lauda-
te Iah 333.9
alleluia quando Dauid cantauerit, quã-
do non 333 9
alleluia quid 290.8.
Alpharabius in libro de entibus mutatis,
Ioannis ſapientiã ponderat, & multi
facit 190.4
Alpetragius ideas à ſubſtantiæ cæli eſſe
putat 190.4
alteritas in particularibus dominatur.
folio 92.11
alteritas productarum rerum arithme-
tica proportione declaratur 91.11
altitudo murorum, alia ciuitatis 426.3
Amalech, Moab, Amon, & Philiſtini,
quid ſignent myſtice 161.36
amalech princip

**Previous page text for continuity:**
id 243.19
Agros non omnino demetendos agrario
præcepto ſancitum eſt 48.11
Alaazel uel ſpica Venerea in gradu 15
Libræ. folio 82.31
Alabaſtrites undè 75.18
Ala Corui ſiniſtra in 12 gradu Libræ.
folio 82.31
Ala Corui dextera in 7 gradu Libræ.

---

INDEX

[Left Column]
why it is cold for us 355.6
Mercury asserts that it is improper for a good man to reveal divine secrets. folio 467.1.
It is one thing to seek one, and to strive towards one, than to become one 461.1
Alleluia signifies praise Yah. 83.32
why Alleluia is not said in time of penance, which is interpreted as praise Yah 333.9
when David sang Alleluia, when not 333 9
what Alleluia 290.8.
Alpharabius in the book concerning mutable entities, considers John's wisdom, and values it highly 190.4
Alpetragius thinks ideas are from the substance of heaven 190.4
Otherness dominates in particulars. folio 92.11
The otherness of created things is shown by arithmetical proportion 91.11
height of walls, another of the city 426.3
Amalek, Moab, Ammon, & Philistines, what they mystically signify 161.36
Amalek, princip

[Right Column]

folio 82.31
Cheerfulness, and the manners of a friend are indicated by blood 102.4
Albertus Magnus so fashioned a bronze head, that that head spoke. 379.9
Alchameth in the 17th degree of Libra. fol. 82.31
Alcinous in the book concerning the doctrine of Plato posits ideas 192.7
Alcinous the Platonist, what concerning the creation of the world 9.8
Aldebaran in the 25th degree of Aries 82.31
Aleph, what it signifies 167.3
Aleph, how mysterious it is 89.6
Aleph, the beginning of letters, signifies unity, the beginning of numbers. 98.18
Aleph, Daleth, Mem, in the name Adam, signify that three things are in man 103.5
Aleph, Mem, Sin, three, by which all things are composed, suggest the elements 96.17
Alexander Milesius with Gregory Nazianzen, what concerning the harmony of the world. 163.1
Alexander, follower of Aristotle, makes the soul mortal 26.1
Alexander Milesius, what concerning God filling all things 166.2
Alexander & Eupolemon, what they state concerning Noah 2.1
Alexander the Peripatetic, having opined that the virtue of stones arises from the elements themselves or from qualities, which is shown to be false 420.4
Alexander born, predicted by the magi to be the destruction of Asia 372.3
Algazel, splendor of the Saracens. 14.12
Algazel fights for the newness of the world and its tranquility 14.12
Algazel solves the proposition, The instant is the principle of past, present, and future. 13.10
Algazel, what he thinks concerning the creation of man 99.1

c ij...

--- Page 35 ---
**MATTERS.**

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 36 ---
**INDEX**

[Left Column]

The soul in the body, as if in a melting pot, why it is placed there to be purified/refined. 391.5
The soul enclosed in the body perhaps both is perfected and at the same time perfects. 391.5
The soul is in the body as a form perfecting the body itself, say the Peripatetics and theologians. 391.5
The soul of an animal is in its blood, says Moses. 105.9
Animals were not produced from the beginning venomous and hostile to the human race, except after sin. 377.7
What the soul can do in each member. page. 94.15
Although the soul operates as a whole, it does not do so according to its whole self, even if it is not divisible. 49.15
The soul removed from the body wills, understands, moves according to place. 94. 9
The soul placed in the body for the sake of perfecting and purifying. 392.6
The soul is in a certain way all things. 350.1
The soul in s...

--- Page 37 ---
MATTERS.

[Left Column]
The soul has unity in the intellect itself,
  and multitude tending towards lower
  things                               90.9
The single soul, tending towards lower things,
  is divided                           90.9
What the soul is, is variously defined by
  various philosophers                 28.4
The rational soul is a certain medium between
  the lower animal and the higher
  divine.                              384.1
How the soul is corporeal.             384.1
The soul is the immediate form of the body. 384.1
The soul is a higher harmony           350.1
The soul is the principle of understanding, of feeling,
  and of moving according to place     118.26
When the soul drinks from the stream of Lethe.
                                       355.6
The soul would not suffer the torment of fire,
  unless it were in some way corporeal.
                                       385.4
How the soul is naked or appears in the
  beginning.                           355.6
The soul is a fourfold participant in
  harmony                              92.12
The soul must have primary purity so that
  it may praise God                    450.7
The soul is neither saddened nor rejoices. 388.1
The soul is divisible and indivisible. 90.9
Man is an animal of a perishable nature. 386.8
Lower things receive animal power from the sun.
                                        76.20
Animalistic conditions live in man.
                                       106.12
The natural man, or the wisdom of the world, does not
  perceive what belongs to God         165.2
The venomous kind of animals for the punishment of
  rebellious man                       377.7
Of animals, some are cold, others hot, etc.
                                        53.15
What is the immediate end of animals.  13.11

[Right Column]
What is the ultimate end of animals.   13.11
All animals fear man.                  378.8
Which animals are offered for which
  in the law                           243.19
What the animals of holiness are.      155.29
Animals are in God.                    155.29
What the animals seen by Ezekiel are.  155.29
Animals harmonize with the starry heaven and the
  prime mover                           77.22
Why unclean animals were introduced into the ark
  in pairs, but clean ones in sevens.
                                       110.16
All animals are nourished by heat.
                                       410.14
Animals which are generated from putrefaction by the
  favor of Saturn                       76.21
Animals which are called Phoebean.      79.27
Animals which are Lunar.                81.30
Animals shown to the prophets.         438.3
The four animals of holiness, and what
  they signify                         437.3
Animals which are ruled by Mercury.
                                        80.29
That the soul is a circle, or a number, not
  according to material mathematics.
                                        36.12
How they understood the soul to be a number. 350.1
Aristotle calls our supreme soul the
  active intellect.                     93.13
It is impossible for the human soul not to
  love something.                      110.15
The body, prone to sins, renders the soul
  capable of suffering.                408.10
He who says that the soul is saddened or rejoices,
  says that it weaves or unweaves.     388.1
Xistus the Pythagorean used to say that the
  soul of man is the temple of God.    123.33
Transformations of souls.              107.13
                                     c  iiij

--- Page 38 ---
**INDEX**

[Column 1]

Why God placed the soul, which is changeable in the body, and the mutable mind. 391.5
Some say that souls, angels, and demons, separated from an earthly body, have ethereal bodies. 412.16
whether human souls migrate into beasts or not. 107.13
that souls are in stones, according to the opinion of the ancients. 104.8
Parisian theologians say that souls differ. 350.2
that our souls are placed in spheres. folio 94.14
whether the Creator made all souls equal. folio 350.2
Corruptible and mortal souls, by common consent of the Peripatetics, emerge from the bosom of matter. folio 195.10
but they did not determine whether intellectual souls are mortal or immortal, nor whence they come. But Aristotle, their leader, speaks doubtfully about that soul. 195.10
Why souls have been distributed with such great inequality. 351.3
inasmuch as soul and body are natural, there is no disagreement.

--- Page 39 ---
**MATTERS.**

| Left Column | Right Column |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 40 ---
**INDEX**

[Column 1]

Why water does not overwhelm the earth 52.14
By what kind of water we ought to be reborn. 266.2
The water by which we are reborn is the Son of God. folio 266.2
Water signifies God's clemency and piety 68.11
Elemental water in baptism is a sign of that supramundane living water. folio 128.3.
Water lives, to which the seed of animals is attributed. 204.6
Water agrees with the Son of God 128.4
Water mostly consists of elements 52.14
That water differs from water in goodness and weight according to region, location, and air. folio 53.15
Poets call water Neptune. 48.10
Thales of Miletus considered water the beginning of all things 26.1
Which regions are subject to Aquarius with Saturn 396.10
There you will find the other signs and subject regions.
That the supercelestial waters, if the heaven did not obstruct, would make these lower ones more fertile folio 137.12
By the waters by which we are reborn 138.12
The waters fail, harmed by the song of the fountain. folio 380.9
Waters follow the Moon as if handmaidens 72.14
The figure of water from twenty bases and twelve angles 54.17
The supercelestial waters are angels. 139.12
The figure of water is an icosahedron 83.32
What waters are in higher places 447.2
What the Arabs say about angels in their theology 366.4
With what endowments the Arabs are gifted. 78.25.

[Column 2]

Arabia offers frankincense 320.20
What Arabia, Mount Sinai, and Mesopotamia of Syria signify 160.35
Arabia threefold 315.18
How Arabia is divided 319.20
Alexander the Macedonian vehemently loved Arabia because of its wealth 319.20
The greedy Arab to bite divine wise men 194.9
The accursed Arab, sometimes called impious 193.9
'Arachiba' is not the firmament, as our translation has it, but the globe and mass of all the heavens 39.1
What Aratus and Pythagoras say about man. folio 189.3
What Aratus thinks about God under the name of Jupiter 166.2
Biges the Athenian was the first of all to yoke oxen to the plow 19.14
Free will in the heart.
What is the tree of life 203.3
To whom and how the tree of life was communicated 204.6
Man, an inverted tree 106.11
The tree of life forbidden to man, so that from it he might recognize the Lord 99.1
Where the tree of life was planted 203.4
Some trees are vegetative, there are also human trees, there are also angelic trees, and there is that supreme singular tree 132.7
The tree of life in Hebrew is 'ezbaüm', that is, the tree of lives and not of life 205.8
Why the tree of life was forbidden from the beginning. 328.2
When and why the tree of life was forbidden. folio 204.6
How the tree of life was formed 203.5
What is the tree of the supernal city, and whom

--- Page 41 ---
**CONTENTS.**

| Left Column | Right Column |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 42 ---
INDEX

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :------------ | :------------- |
| ...was consistent with facts, or because Plato had not explained [it] to that evil spirit Aristotle. 194.9 | Aristotle falsely claims Plato's ideas are monsters. 12.9 |
| Aristotle does not use demonstration in his natural progress. 22.17 | Aristotle had the eyes of a bat, inasmuch as they did not discern ideas, which are most manifest in nature. 12.9 |
| Aristotle, in his book on physics, proves everything from pre-accepted and pre-supposed [principles] made by him. 22.17 | Aristotle defines the soul from posterior things and effects. 28.4 |
| Aristotle was moved only by sensible things, just as irrational animals [are moved] by oats and hay present, or at least nearby. 194.9 | Aristotle, a most sagacious teacher of others' doctrines, and a diligent collector. folio 22.17 |
| Aristotle celebrates the opinion of Simonides, by which he asserted God to be solely metaphysical. 11.8 | Aristotle, a cunning accuser of the ancients. 22.17 |
| Aristotle was less distant from religion than Averroes. 15.12 | Aristotle, the most ungrateful of all, does not attack the opinions of the ancients, but disputes against words rather than meanings. 22.17 |
| Aristotle confesses religion to be inherent in human nature. 15.12 | What Aristotle teaches about the power of God. folio 105.3 |
| Aristotle established God as the principle and moderator of this machine [i.e., the universe]. folio 15.12 | Aristotle denies God to be the creator of all things. 282.1 |
| Aristotle, in the book "On the World," professes God to be the creator of the world-machine; then, proceeding through sensible reasons, he denies it. 15.12 | Aristotle unjustly accused many distinguished men. 22.17 |
| Aristotle, by what way [he explains] multiple motions, fourfold qualities, three principles of things, four causes. 38.14 | Aristotle accuses those from whom he learned everything. 22.17 |
| Aristotle seeks the highest from the lowest, while Plato [does] the opposite. 38.14 | Aristotle, compelled by truth, claims only refutations for himself. 22.17 |
| Aristotle is called an evil spirit. 194.9 | Aristotle collected everything from the ancients. folio 22.17 |
| What Aristotle said about the fifth essence. 42.15 | Aristotle laments that the human eye is dim towards divine things, and that discourse about divine substance is very scarce among us; yet he refuses to believe those to whom God has revealed [it]. 194.9 |
| Aristotle, a disciple of Zeno, believes that the form of God cannot be understood. folio 4.2 | Aristotle did not know divine things, or did not want to know them. 195.10 |
| Aristotle accuses his teacher Plato of ignorance (he himself being ignorant) because he alone believes the fabric of the world to be most harmonious, and generates [it]. 9.8 | Aristotle, disagreeing with his teacher, now attributes divinity to the mind, now says the world is God, now places some other [being] in charge of the world, now heaven, now the ardor of heaven. 4.2 |

--- Page 43 ---
MATTERS.

Aristotle believes that God does not understand these particulars, and in the discourse on good and bad fortune, he believes the fortunate person is directed by God. 18.14
Aristotle left many things written with manifest contradiction. 18.14
Aristotle, out of envy, falsely and impiously attacks his teacher, says Franciscus the theologian. 194.9
Aristotle was the worst metaphysician. 194.9
Aristotle, in physics, was the inventor of nothing (he himself being the author in the *Elenchi*), but a compiler of all things from his predecessors. 194.9.
Aristotle, compelled by truth, claims only the *Elenchi* for himself. 194.9
Aristotle withdrew from the divine symposium, having been engaged in the rules of arguing and sensible things. 194.9
Aristotle, most ungrateful towards his most learned and most holy teacher Plato. 22.17
Aristotle wanted to seem to devise something new, as Adrastus says. 88.5
Aristotle was persuaded by Plato's letter to sail to Judea and Egypt. 3.1.
Aristotle impiously and unjustly ridicules his teacher, like an ungrateful disciple. 193.8
Aristotle accused Parmenides, Melissus, Democritus, Pythagoras, and his divine teacher Plato. 22.17
Aristotle ridicules Plato, who everywhere admits the world to be generated, and in the book *On the World* asserts God to be the maker of the world and the ruler of the universe. 18.14
Aristotle, a most trifling brawler, falsely slandered Parmenides concerning error. 190.5
Aristotle, the prince of the Peripatetics, dissented from Plato so that he might be considered unique and more famous. 38.14
Aristotle doubts whether God is animate or not. 4.2

Aristotle confirms the most weighty passages of philosophy by the testimony of Simonides and Homer. 48.10
Aristotle, what he says about accidental things. 375.5.
Aristotle, concerning the nature of animals. 24.18
Aristotle, in words, even if he dissents from ideas, yet in reality, whether he wants to or not, he agrees. 192.7
Aristotle, in the book *On the Heavens and the World*, confesses the world to have been fabricated by a craftsman, which he denies in physics. 192.c4.7.
Aristotle, because he ridiculed ideas, is deservedly refuted by Themistius and Simplicius, his interpreters. 194.9
Aristotle always tried, says Themistius, to contradict what is apparent. folio 194.9
Aristotle proves contingency. 17.14
Aristotle, concerning the knowledge of God in his first philosophy, venerates the Chaldean fathers, yielding to them because they received from oracles what they handed down. 194.9
Aristotle and Averroes understood nothing concerning the fabric of the world. 197.12
Aristotle criticizes the opinions of the ancients so that he might seem to be the only wise one. 22.17.
Aristotle, what he said about happiness in his *Politics*. 462.2
Aristotle describes physiognomy in many places. 102.4
Aristotle could not explain whence the soul comes. 273.10
Aristotle, Alexander, Averroes, Epicurus, and similar ones shining with some small torches of doctrine are not to be believed. 10.8
Aristotle, concerning the eternity of the world, is not to be believed. 9.8
Aristotle, the reason why the world is eternal for him. folio 13.11
Aristotle's error concerning the eternity of the world lies in equivocation, by arguing from the immediate to the ultimate end. 13.11
d

--- Page 44 ---
INDEX

**Column 1**
Aristotle's errors, and the Peripatetics'
   errors concerning ideas 193.8
Aristotle's discussion concerning the soul is
   equivocal 350.1
Why Aristotle's philosophy is judged faulty
   by some 313.16
Aristotle's heresy, and most trifling derision
   concerning ideas, is of less authority
   than that of so many and grave philoso-
   phers asserting ideas. 192.7
Aristotle's assertions concerning the eternity
   of the world are trifling 9.8
The author refutes Aristotle's fallacious
   arguments concerning ideas. 194.9
The Areopagus was formerly a council of
   only nine men 20.15.
The Areopagus afterwards became of fifty
   men, and from whom, see. 20. 16
Christ taught arithmetic. 275.11
Arithmetical mean for cities. 92.11
The arms by which the enemy was conquered,
   which. folio 455.3
What Noah taught the Armenians, Scythians,
   then Italians 2.1
Art cannot overcome nature. 446.1.
Art is distinguished from nature 12.9
A certain art of divine numbers.
   folio 364.2
Sublimated arsenic corrodes and consumes
   all metals except gold. 416.1
All articles of faith refer to Christ 282.1
The art lives in the mind of the artisan. 7.5.
The artisan introduces an artificial form and
   presupposes a natural one; but a natural
   agent [introduces] a substantial form and
   presupposes matter created by God out of
   nothing 12.9
The artisan delights in his works.
   folio 299.3

**Column 2**
Haruspices or extispices who, by inspecting
   entrails, predicted future events. 372.3.
Ascent to heavenly things is difficult 460.2.
Daedalus invented the axe 19.14
Asians and Africans adhering to the most
   foul Mahomet badly divided the spoils 318.19
The she-ass prefigures the animalistic man
   in sacred writings 171.7.
The she-ass sometimes signifies the common
   people 171.7
A certain ass made into a man in our century
   on the island of Chersonesus Illyrici is
   confirmed by the testimony of many. 330.9
The aspect of the signs to earthly regions is
   referred analogously to the supramundane
   heavens 307.11
"Asser" in Hebrew, what it signifies
   relatively. folio 97.18
How "Asser" is interpreted. 303.6.
Ahasuerus took Esther as his wife.
   folio 439.1
What Assur is 148.22
The Assyrians, most famous after the
   Apostles and Prophets. 319.20
The Assyrians, first inventors of letters. 2.1
The Assyrians call the sun Adad. 74.17.
The stars often foretell in various ways.
   folio 371.1
Christ taught the best astrology.
   folio 275 11
The Chaldeans and Egyptians invented
   astrology 18.14
Astronomers divined by the stars.
   folio 372.3
That the influence of the stars is most
   excellent. 46.8.
The first library of Athens, where it was
   erected. folio 313.16
The Athenians employed divine seers in
   public councils 372.3

--- Page 45 ---
MATTERS.

[Column 1]

Famous Athenians. 2.1
Democritus and Empedocles made atoms the indivisible principle of things. folio 37.13
Multiple attraction. 208.12
What scholastic theologians call attributes. folio 8.6
The greedy man sucks the blood of the poor, like a leech. 410.13
The wise man listening, misinterpreted. folio 216.23
We must listen to what God speaks within us. 343.9
The function and object of hearing. 345.10
Hearing serves the intellect more than other senses. folio 345.10
Averroes, blasphemous against the most holy laws of God. 14.12
Averroes accuses of error things full of divinity. 14.12
What Averroes interprets in Aristotle to be said only of the heavens. 16.13
Averroes presupposes what all wise men would deny. 14.12
Averroes, a treacherous dog, does not interpret Aristotle, but corrupts him. 16.13
Averroes, a blasphemer, also makes others blaspheme. 16.13
Averroes falsely claims that God could not give permanence except in seed. folio 16.13
What Averroes says about ideas. 190.4
Averroes denies God to be the maker of the world, and in the book 'On the Heavens' confesses God to be the creator. 18.14
Averroes, the blasphemous Arab, thinks the world cannot have another disposition. 12.10
Averroes, impious, that eternal heaven which all other things strive to emulate

[Column 2]

strive. 16.13
Averroes says that Algazel directed war against all philosophers. 14.12.
Averroes is condemned by his faithful interpreter, and called a fool. 14.12
Averroes, a malevolent soul into which God's wisdom disdained to enter. 14.12
Averroes' arguments are childish and old-womanish fictions. 14.12
Averroes' opinion on the intellect, attacked. folio 357.7
Averroes' doctrine, at first glance unshaken, probable and useful, but more truly false, impious. 14.12
Birds which belong to Mercury, musical and sonorous. 80.29
Why many birds of different species sing musically together. 30.6
Birds which are solar. 79.27.
Augurs announced future events through birds. folio 372.3
Augustine, what he thinks about sensible things. 12.10
Augustine, against five heresies. 274.10
Augustine, what he says about man's free will. 168.5
Augustine, with Basil, soars to the highest things to be celebrated in anagogical song. folio 33.9
Augustine, intent on meditation, did not notice a woman consulting him. folio 374.4
Augustine, while in Italy, heard of certain women so imbued with wicked arts that, given the chance, they would change men into beasts of burden. 380.9.
Augustine, Ambrose, Eusebius, Pamphilus, & Cyril, what they say about Pythagoras, Plato. 3.1
Augustine, easily the foremost of theologians, values ideas so highly that he believes no one can be wise without knowledge of them. 195.10
d ij

--- Page 46 ---
**INDEX**

| [Column 1] | [Column 2] |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 47 ---
MATTERS.

[Left Column]

The beard signifies strength 242.18
The beard not to be shaved 226 6
The beard which is to be shaved in a man. 243.18
Baruch is not found in the canon of the Hebrews 188.2
Basil and Anaxagoras held Homer in very high esteem, and admire and revere his poetry 48.10
Basil, Gregory Nazianzen and ancient doctors say that demons have bodies 412.16
How Bassan is interpreted 319.20
Those blessed minds cannot be in continuous motion, because all motions tend towards rest 13.11
Blessed are those who wash their robes in the blood of the lamb 141.15
How "blessed are the poor in spirit" is to be understood 462.1
What blessedness is according to our theologians 461.1
Blessedness consists in vision and fruition 362.12
What blessedness is 6.5.
Those who believe in the state and progress of the blessed should not consider it inconvenient, and why 465.3
Who is blessed according to Plato. 462.1
Who is blessed 6.5
Behemoth in Hebrew, what it signifies in Latin 345.10
The Marsic War foretold and prevented by the sweat and blood of statues 371.1
War declared to the ancient fathers against Amalek and others 333.9
What the war against the Amalekites and other kings signifies 333.9
How war is declared to the enemy. page 453. 1

[Right Column]

Well-being cannot exist in the universe unless the parts are rightly arranged; thus it is arranged by nature 325.24
What the blessing of Benjamin by father Jacob was like 318.19
The harmony of the blessings of three families, who pitched their camps against the third trigone, with the peoples directed by it 316.19
The harmony of the blessings of two other tribes of this trigone with the signs and peoples suitable to it. page 315.18
Benjamin raised to heavenly things. 321.7.1
Benjamin called by a double name : page 320.21.
How Benjamin is interpreted. page 304.6
Beraca among the Hebrews signifies blessing and a pool 140.15
Berosus the Chaldean, Mainetus the Egyptian, Hieronymus the Phoenician, King Darius, Ptolemy Mendesius, Menander of Ephesus, Nicolaus Damascenus, Abydenus the historian, Estius, Theodorus, Chorilus, Ezekiel the poet, Demetrius the historian, Hecataeus the Abderite philosopher, and many others thought well of Moses' miracles. 9.8
What power the beryl has for one carrying it. page 80.28
The beryl stone bestows good talent. page 419.3
Beryl born from water 52.14
How Bethlehem is interpreted. 304.6
The Phrygian nation first yoked two-horse chariots. 19.14
Bilbam or Balaban, what about the future Messiah 186.2
Bilbam or Balaam, for what reason no-
d iij

--- Page 48 ---
**INDEX**

[Left Column]

[Balaam, for what he] earned/suffered for cursing the people of God. page 187.2
Binary number unlucky & evil. page 110.16
Binary evil, and pertaining to matter which is the source and origin of all evils. 110.16
Binary, by the Pythagoreans, is not called a number. 90.9
Binary: always an unlucky number. page 283.1.
Binary signifies matter. 383.1
How pairs are interpreted. 328.1
Binary unlucky. 91.11
Demosthenes testifies that the Erythraeans built a bireme. 19.14
An earthquake indicated the overthrow of Byzantium. 371.1
Blasphemy swallowed up the Sodomites, Gomorrahans. 171.7
Blasphemy destroyed eighty-five thousand from the army of the Assyrians. 171.7
Blasphemy, how many thousands, what nations it destroyed. 171.7
Blasphemy overwhelmed the Egyptians with waters. page 171.7
Boethius, what he sings/writes about the spirit infused into things. 166.2
Boethius calls the first kind of formal music 'mundane'. 163.1
What kind of worms silkworms are. 401.1
Earthly goods were the cause that Peter's successors degenerated from Christ. page 379.8
We receive all corporeal goods from the light of the sun. 432.1
Goods prepared by God. 453.1
Earthly goods bestowed upon Peter's successors took away heavenly goods, that is, power over all the enemy's strength. 379.8

[Right Column]

By what fire the good are to be refined in judgment. page 410.14
What true goodness is. 466.1
Good, by its nature, is communicative. page 15.12
Good, distributing, divides how and when it wishes. 15.12
Good by nature tends towards communicating good. 15.12
Good, which all things desire. 466.1
Good is as ample as the existence of all things. 465.1
Good is always better in what is better. page 16.13
Good happens in only one way. 65.9
Each good is called good because it participates in the highest good, how this is to be understood. 457.2
What true and highest good is. 465.1
Every good is easy to govern. 377.6
Good above every being. 393.7
Good is the beginning and end of all evils. 329.4
What an ox signifies. 140.15
What the Egyptian ox signifies. 187.2
Fine linen are the justifications of the saints. page 389.3
Brechia offer a great sacred rite to great Jupiter. 117.24
The arm of God, his power by which he performed wonders. 389.2
Brahmans and Academics, perceiving divine doctrine, what they thought about this homeland. 273.10
Brahmans among the Indians (who are also called Jews) philosophized before the Greeks. page 3.1
The British sea produces pearls. page 52.15
What 'bravium' signifies in the scriptures. 456.1

--- Page 49 ---
**CONTENTS.**

Caution in the life of brutes. 339. and 340.6

**C**

Who the Caatites are, and how they are interpreted. 333.22
Custom of the Cabalists 386.8
How large a reed 425.1
Calanus the Indian predicted death to Alexander 372.3
Stones are produced chiefly in the kidneys in martial people 117.25
What miracle happened to Callisthenes at Thebes in the temple of Hercules 169.6
The cup of suffering, how it is to be drunk. 444.2
Heat mixed with waters 410.14
The nature of heat has vital power in itself. folio 410.4
Calotechnus, i.e., a good artisan. 427.1
A camel has double knees, other animals do not 23.17
A pregnant camel carries for twelve months 113.19
Cancer is the principal gate of descent of the star-bearing heavens. 367.7
Cancer, the dwelling of the Moon and as it were the breast of the sky 112.18
Cancer rules over the chest. 111.17
Causes of Cancer (the disease) 116.23
Canis Major in the 6th or 7th degree of Cancer. folio 82.31
Canis Minor in the 17th degree of Cancer. 82.31
Who the Regular Canons are, and whence. 323.22
Diverse nature of dogs 81.30
Songs are divided into three kinds: sensual, intellectual, and divine 178.16
Which is the Canticle of Zechariah concerning redemption 458.2
Hairs, says Origen, are virtues of the soul 409.12
Who the hairs of the Nazarenes are 409.12
Hairs signify the thoughts and works of men in sacred writings 409.15

Hairs which will not perish 115.21
Which hair will not perish. 408.12
What roe deer, stags, and fawns signify 155.30
Capricorn is the principal gate of ascent of the star-bearing heavens 367.7
The tail of Capricorn in the 16th degree of Aquarius. folio 82.31
Capricorn, the dwelling of Saturn. 180.18
Capricorn rules both knees. 111.17
Who the captives freed in the death of Christ are. folio 435.3
The carbuncle shines in darkness 420.4
The material of the carbuncle 128.25
Carbuncle, called anthrax by the Greeks. 59.3
Some Cardinals are appointed by the pontiff, others always assist 439.2
The poems of Manilius in which each part of the human body is subjected to some sign 112.17
"Ceres harmed by song" and so on, Ovid sings of this kind 380.9
With what flesh and with what body the sleeping are to be raised 408.11
We shall be raised with flesh and body, because that which dies sprouts forth with a better fate 408.11
Meats were not in use before the flood, but for what purpose was Cain made a hunter, and Lamech his killer? folio 76.20
Some added "of his flesh" to the resurrection of the flesh 407.11
Flesh and blood cannot possess the kingdom of God 407.9
Which is the flesh prepared in the heavenly nuptials 444.3
The Caspians are cruel 319.20
What chance and fortuitous event is. folio 375.5
The Syrian Phoenicians discovered the catapult
d iiij

--- Page 50 ---
INDEX
folio 19.14
Each troop of heavenly guests has its own dwellings 440.3
Cato with a prophetic mind said about Caesar, beware of the ill-girt boy.
folio 372.3
Lion cubs are interpreted as our enemies 239.15
A secondary cause can remove the force from a thing which it supplied 6.5
A primary cause does not remove force from a thing.
folio 6.5
A secondary cause, whatever it does, acts by the power of the primary 6.5
The primary cause extends to everything to be produced, and unites it to itself at will.
folio 399.17
The primary cause is the agent, according to a power determined by itself, and not according to all-encompassing power. 399.17
The primary cause is not to be blamed, the secondary (is).
folio 46.9
Some philosophers have investigated causes only in the powers and qualities of inferior bodies 49.11
Angelic secondary causes 94.14
Four causes of all things 96.17
The Rhodians invented the celox 19.14
Censorinus, whether the egg or the bird was prior to

--- Page 51 ---
MATTERS.

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

--- Page 52 ---
**INDEX**

[Left Column]

Christians of our time do not know God 343.8
It is not granted to Christians. 441.2
Only the name is left to Christians, Christian piety having been cast aside. 133.8
Christ now scarcely recognizes Christians, because of impiety & infidelity 133.8
To Christ alone belongs the four-letter name 298.2
To Christ the governance of the universe committed by the Father 325.24
All priestly things are due to Christ. folio 220.3
Some assert Christ to be the subject of all theology. 282.1
How we have Christ prefigured as a fountain from sacred scripture. 291.9
What it signifies that Christ is clothed in a long robe 179.17
The first Phoenicians received Christ. folio 314.17
Why the world did not know Christ. folio 294.11
Christ to be the true Lord foretold by Mosaic prophecies 296.1
What it signifies that Christ ascended into a chariot drawn by four white horses folio 455.3
Christ in this life was always delighted in the midst 330.25
Christ was the best mediator. 331.6.
Christ will at last draw all who are to be drawn 215.19
Christ cleansing water 355.5
Christ the head of the church 324.24
Christ knows all things, even the most minute. folio 324.24
Christ is the true tree placed in the midst of paradise 328.2

[Right Column]

Christ does not wish to be joined to the bride unless she is adorned 430.1
Christ advanced in wisdom, not in appearance 465.3
Christ fought most greatly in his passion 455.3
Christ began to triumph in the resurrection 455.3
Why Christ is not said to reign in the house of Abraham, since the promise was made to him 299.2
Christ justly claimed the hereditary right for himself 458.2
To what death Christ & Paul provoke us 464.1
Christ our emperor had a just cause for war 453.1
Why Christ asked for water from the Samaritan woman. 431.1
Christ born of a woman alone. 326.25
Christ is compared to a lion 314.17
Christ is the middle person in the most holy trinity 328.1
Christ a priest forever. 426.2.
Christ was before Moses & the other prophets, by whose power shadowy sacrifices were made 293.10.
Christ paid Adam's debt. 441.1
How Christ sent the elect to preach 305.7
Christ the door & access to divine vision 462.1.
Christ is called the legitimate son of Isaac folio 299.3
Christ anointed us with the oil of divinity. 430.1
Christ called the sun. 342.8
Christ the way by which we ascend to God the Father 331.7
Christ according to the Apostle's opinion how the mediator of the new testament

--- Page 53 ---
CONTENTS.

| Left Column | Right Column |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 54 ---
The provided text consists solely of dots, indicating that no Latin text was supplied for translation. Therefore, there is nothing to translate.

--- Page 55 ---
**CONTENTS.**

Christ is truth 248.2
Christ is the beginning, middle, & end 248.2
Christ, the truth of the law 248.3.
Christ, the foundation of the church. 129.5
Christ, the cornerstone. 129.5
Christ, the stone placed at the head of the corner. folio 129.5
Christ, the rock which Moses struck in the desert, from which abundant waters flowed 129.5
Christ, born in the third year of the reign of Herod Ascalonites 297.1
Christ baptized no one except John. 166.2
Christ, what he taught concerning the affair of man 272.10
Christ perfected the law 251.5
Christ, in which places his coming is foretold 249.3

--- Page 56 ---
I N D E X

| | |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 57 ---
MATTERS.

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

--- Page 58 ---
**INDEX**

folio 447.2
Knowledge of truth does not come from the senses.
folio 463.2
Self-knowledge, how much it avails for guiding the
temperaments of the soul and body. 340.7
Collection of waters, twofold. 137.12
Color, what it is according to Orpheus and Plotinus. 434.4
Blue and white color [signify] phlegm.
folio 102.4
Earthy color, what it signifies in a person. 102.4
Colors on the surface, indicators of redundant humor in the body. 102.4
Colors of priestly vestments, what they signify. 222.5
Composition of colors by art. 99.1
Holy men had intimate conversations with God in the Holy of Holies. 83.32.
Hair, for whom it should not be cut. 226.6
The heavens and all their host were completed: and not, as our translation has it, all their adornment. 89.7
Compounds have only one face.
folio 58.3
That all composite things contain four elements. folio 52.14
Every composite thing, when it is dissolved, is dissolved into four elements. 59.3
Most sweet harmony and eternal rest.
folio 413. proem.
Conception and birth intervene in the consummation of marriage. 442.4.
Harmony of the heavens. 178.16
Christ the preacher, an excellent example for preachers, always drew sinners with inexpressible kindness and charity, as in the case of the adulteress, the publican, the tax collector, and not by terrifying. 169.6

The preacher, even if he must sometimes denounce the crimes of the people with a loud voice, is nevertheless commanded by God to present them with charity, admonishing.
folio 169.6
The preacher will achieve a far greater result in charity and love than in fear and trembling. 169.6
The divine preacher is commanded to attract sinners to God rather by the sweet bonds of charity than by horrible terror. 169.6
The divine preacher ought to draw his hearers more by coaxing than by terrifying. 169.6
A preacher full of charity can do all things in Him who strengthens him.
folio 169.6
Let the preacher note that the net was not torn, when there were so many and such great fish, what it signifies. 169.6.
The virtue and office of the preacher, exhibited with charity, is strengthened and confirmed with God's help. 169.6
The harmony of the blessings which Jacob gave to his twelve sons with the twelve peoples to whom the twelve Apostles preached, according to the order of the signs to which they correspond. folio 311.14
Harmony in the supermundane bridal chamber, a cause of blessedness according to Augustine. 499.5
Harmony of mind pleases the prince.
folio 499 5
Harmony of the blessing given to Judah with the people directed by the sign corresponding to him. 314.17
Worldly concupiscence, with what wine it has made the nations drink. 443.2

--- Page 59 ---
**CONTENTS.**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
The preacher, even if he ought sometimes to denounce crimes to the people with a loud voice, is nevertheless commanded by God to propose them by admonishing with charity. Page 169.6
The preacher will make far greater progress in charity and love than in fear and trembling 169.6
The divine preacher is commanded to attract sinners to God with sweet bonds of charity rather than with dreadful terror 169.6
The divine preacher ought to draw listeners more by coaxing than by terrifying 169.6
The preacher full of charity can do all things in Him who strengthens him. Page 169.6
Let the preacher note what it signifies that the net was not torn when there were so many and such great fish 169.6.
The preacher's virtue and office, exercised with charity, is strengthened and confirmed with God's help. 169.6
Harmony of the blessings which Jacob gave to his twelve sons with the twelve peoples, to whom the twelve Apostles preached, according to the order of the signs to which they correspond. Page 311.14
Harmony in the supracelestial bridal chamber as the cause of blessedness, according to Augustine. 499.5


--- Page 60 ---
**INDEX**

Cor impij quasi mare feruens, quod nun-
quam quiescere potest 412.16
Cor soli comparatur, cerebrū uerò Lu-
næ. 342.8
Cor præcipua animæ sedes 265.1
Corallus lætitiam affert homini. 370.1
Cornelio sacerdoti admiranda contige-
runt 374.4
Cornu quid mysticè significet 6.5
Cornua altaris sanguine tincta quid.
page 234.12
Cor Pharaonis induratum 154.5
Corruptibile & incorruptibile. 352.9
Corruptibilis corporis forma, non eadē
cum ea quæ resurget glorificanda.
page 408.11
Corruptibilium & incorruptibilium 9.
genera 40.2
Corpori trimetro nil addi potest. 40.2.
Corporis duodecim præcipuæ iuncturæ
page 280.18
Corporis partibus quibus amica Venus
præsit. 119 27
Corporis humani proportiones eædem
quæ in arcæ Noë longitudine, latitu-
dine, altitudine sunt 101.3
Corpora qualia futura in extremo iudi-
cio 407.9
Corpora humana in lapides uersa.
page 428.2
corporis dissonātia unde oriatur. 337.3
Corporis humani commensuratio. 335.1
Corporis humani singulorum membro-
rum proportio 100.2
Corporis temperantia, & dispositio tē-
torij per naturales medelas. 338.5
Corporis humani sectio 110.15
Corporis totius hominis pportio ad trū-
cum sesquioctaua 101.3
Corporum suscitādorūm quæ mutatio

futura 407.9
Corpus glorificatum sine loci circūscrip-
tione 407.9
Corpus mysticum septuaginta duorum
electorum corpori nostro compara-
tur. 323.23
Corpus templum animæ, ipsa autem se-
des Dei 141.15
Corpus humanum in longitudine trecen-
torum, in latitudine quinquaginta, &
triginta minutorum altitudine. 103.
Corpus glorificatum quale futurum sit.
page 408.10
Corpus temperatur corroboraturque
& consequenter totus homo cælesti
fauore 341.8
Corpus nostrum tertium instrumentum
est harmoniæ 447.2
Corpus inter membra & diuina conso-
nantiam habet 448.3
Corpus, si animæ naturam induerit, æ-
ternitatem consequetur 13.10
Corpus cæleste quod, Platonicis testibus
page 402.1
Corpus non minus conuenit Deo uestito
quam nudo 389.3
Correspondentia cum planetis & octa-
uo cælo 113.19.
Coruus egrediens egrediebatur & re-
uertebatur, & non ut habet æditio,
& non reuertebatur 378.8
Coruus ab arca egressus magnum my-
sterium indicat 378.8
Coruus in scripturis quid 451.1
Cotta Ciceronis de Diis differentes sug-
gillat 3.2
crapula ciborum corporaliū damnatur,
spiritualium uerò laudatur. 446. 5.
cratippus summis Peripateticis par quid
de uatibus 372.3

**INDEX**

[Left Column]

The heart of the wicked like a boiling sea, which can never rest 412.16
The heart is compared to the sun, but the brain to the moon. 342.8
The heart, the principal seat of the soul 265.1
Coral brings joy to man. 370.1
Wonderful things happened to Cornelius the priest 374.4
What the horn mystically signifies 6.5
What the horns of the altar stained with blood signify.
page 234.12
The heart of Pharaoh hardened 154.5
Corruptible and incorruptible. 352.9
The form of the corruptible body, not the same as that which will rise glorified.
page 408.11
9 kinds of corruptible and incorruptible things 40.2
Nothing can be added to a trimetric body. 40.2.
The twelve principal joints of the body
page 280.18
The parts of the body over which friendly Venus presides. 119 27
The proportions of the human body are the same as those in the length, width, and height of Noah's ark 101.3
What kind of bodies will be at the Last Judgment 407.9
Human bodies turned into stones.
page 428.2
Whence the discord of the body arises. 337.3
Commensuration of the human body. 335.1
The proportion of individual members of the human body 100.2
Temperance of the body, and disposition of the frame through natural remedies. 338.5
Section of the human body 110.15
The proportion of the whole body of man to the trunk, one and an eighth 101.3
What change will occur in bodies to be resurrected

[Right Column]

...will be. 407.9
The glorified body without circumscription of place 407.9
The mystical body of the seventy-two elect is compared to our body. 323.23
The body, a temple of the soul, but the soul itself, the seat of God 141.15
The human body in length of three hundred, in width of fifty, and in height of thirty units. 103.
What kind the glorified body will be.
page 408.10
The body is tempered and strengthened, and consequently the whole man by celestial favor 341.8
Our body is the third instrument of harmony 447.2
The body has consonance between its members and divine things 448.3
The body, if it assumes the nature of the soul, will attain eternity 13.10
What the celestial body is, according to Platonic witnesses
page 402.1
A body is no less fitting for God clothed than naked 389.3
Correspondence with the planets and the eighth heaven 113.19.
The raven going forth went forth and returned, and not as the edition has it, "and did not return" 378.8
The raven having gone forth from the ark indicates a great mystery 378.8
What the raven signifies in the scriptures 451.1
Cicero's Cotta censures those who dispute about the Gods 3.2
Gluttony of bodily foods is condemned, but that of spiritual foods is praised. 446. 5.
Cratippus, equal to the greatest Peripatetics, what he says about prophets 372.3

--- Page 61 ---
**CONTENTS.**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

--- Page 62 ---
**INDEX**

[Column 1]

Dante the Tuscan, a man of very keen intellect, prefers Virgil above all others in natural and moral philosophy. 48.10
Daphne useful for comitial diseases. folio 420.4
David bore the figure and type of Christ and the Church. 136.10
David's family extinguished. 304.7
David, by what punishment he is punished for the murder of Uriah the Hittite. 233.11
David, first king. 457.1
David and Solomon prefigured the full moon, of the Mosaic and figurative law. folio 235.13
David made a prophet. 356.6
David called by Jerome now Pindar, now Alcaeus, now Flaccus, because he proceeds in various meters. 180.19
David struck down lions, even bears, unarmed. 377.7
David, having suffered many things, was a type of suffering Christ. 235.13
David loved the harmonic muse not for pleasure, but with faithful love.

[Right Column]

D
The evil demon is a liar and deceitful. folio 386.7.
Demons are aerial and fiery beings. folio 412.16
Demons sometimes for holy intelligences. 93.13
What things put demons to flight. 32.31
Demonic beings have bodies. 411.16
How it is to be understood that demonic bodies transmit to sleepers the forms they receive from imagination. 448.4
Pherecydes the Syrian describes the fall of demons. 46.9
Damascene, what about the incarnation of the Word. folio 189.3
Damascene with Ambrose establish profound opinions and allegorical meanings. folio 33.9
Damascus is said to drink blood. folio 159.34
Dan, interpretation. 303.6
Daniel killed the dragon. 377.7
Daniel's passage: "Seventy weeks are determined upon this people," for which it is held, "shortened." folio 196.10
e iiij...

--- Page 63 ---
MATTERS.

| [Column 1] | [Column 2] |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 64 ---
**INDEX**

| Column 1 | Column 2 |
| :------- | :------- |
| innate to humans, says Averroës 20.16 | God, the exalted sea, and the ocean of infinite substance 138.12 |
| God, that is, the inability to speak about God without illuminating divine light 4.2 | God is all things that are, and all things that are not 166.2 |
| God being angry, repenting, grieving, desiring, and such things, how they are to be understood: for God is not angry. 388.1. | What God is, and if we cannot understand, yet we are taught that God exists by oracles, reason, and consensus. 5.3 |
| Pythagoras forbade speaking of God without light 74.17 | God has concluded all things in unbelief. folio. 353.5 |
| The Hebrews assert that God fashioned the world, first indeed in mind, in the second he unfolded it into proper forms. folio 98.18 | God works all things in all things. 460.2 |
| God would not be most simple if he had a necessary connection with inferior things. 21.16 | God the Father, just as in the generation of the son he did not require a mother, so neither does the son require a mother in the regeneration of humans. folio 266.2 |
| God has in himself the idea of all things folio 438.3 | God was not sluggish in idleness before the birth of the world 15.12 |
| If God sought anything beforehand in creating, he would require a prior God, and thus something prior to all first things, which is absurd 12.9 | God alone is metaphysical 357.7 |
| God with the most just balance sent against us as enemies those who have transgressed. 366.5 | God is impeccable and immutable. folio 392.6 |
| God, by what mystery he is called prince of armies. 89.7 | God endowed man with two gifts, fear and love, by which he may be feared and loved. 378.8 |
| If God, that is, because he was able to give permanence to superior things, therefore also to inferior things, against the barking dog Averroës. 16.13 | God rested in Christ 176.12 |
| God was not impotent in inferior things, who was so powerful in supreme things. 16.13 | God rested, and God the Father works even now, how it is to be understood. folio 176.12 |
| God constituted himself as the exemplar of things to be made, against the opinion of the evil spirit Aristotle. 194.9 | God and nature, how it is to be understood. folio 25.18 |
| God to be praised in silence, how it ought to be understood 467. | God is one 7.6 |
| God is, from whose mouth neither good nor evil will proceed 143.18. | God sometimes a guest, sometimes the highest mountain, sometimes the exalted mountain, sometimes the sublime mountain 134.9 |
| God is not subject to our senses. folio 344.10 | God most full of all fecundities, says Thrice Greatest 15.12. |
| | God, and if all things were made through the Word, yet many things through ministers. 58.3 |
| | God subjected all things to Christ 296.1. |
| | Why God created all things subject to changeable nature 256.9 |

--- Page 65 ---
MATTERS.

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 66 ---
INDEX

[Left Column]

Arm 143.18
God willed diversity to be in man 392.6
God can neither be defined, nor divided, nor composed; this was the reason why none of the Peripatetics knew God. folio 165.2
God, says Parmenides, Himself alone exists as all things 166.2
God is all things eminently 16.13
God, father and head of all 265.1.
God first, then Christ, how He was called father of all. 265.1
God is the source. 139.13
God is entirely free from passions. 388.1
God, triune and undivided, operates externally 41.3
God formed man from the dust of the earth, to be read as 'man is dust'. 239.15
Why God of Abraham is said in the scriptures 456.4
God seemed to delight in the shedding of animal blood in the old law 238.15.
God is wholly everywhere, not divided into parts 203.4
God always spoke to the holy fathers through angels 380.9
God, endowed with the fruitfulness of both sexes, is the source of all fruitfulness. 17.13
God always produces internally; externally, however, according to the will's pleasure. 17.13.
God is a devouring, eating, and consuming fire 391.5
God called for the fellowship of angels when He created man 99.1
God is always joined to us through relations: creator, ruler, governor, etc. 97.18
God is a consuming fire, and not a destroying one, as a faulty translation has it.

[Right Column]

folio 411.14. God does not necessarily act externally. 20.16
God spoke to Moses and the other fathers through an angel 89.6
God understands all things by a single act. 388.1
It is absurd to ask why God made souls unequal 351.3
God, a certain circle 388.1
God before the world, by a certain eternity and order, like matter before form. folio 13.10
God, the end of all things, for whose sake, as beloved and desired, all things move. 16.13
God is blessed without any external good. folio 17.14
What God did before the created world. folio 19.15
The Most High God is not delighted by odors and and tastes, nor is He nourished by foods. 238.15
God fills heaven and earth 165.2
God is one by identity; each of the others they call one by diversity 89.8
The most simple God admits no union and mixture. 399.17
God the Son, water of life and wisdom. folio 130.6
God produced all things by command and word. folio 33 10
God, father of all things, but by a more perfect reason of man 189.3
Right hand is joined to right hand in marriage 441.2.
Numa Pompilius consecrated the Right Hand of Faith 120.29.
Devils can assume nothing unless God permits it 239.15
Devils are said to seek food from God. folio 239. 15.
What devils are 239.15

--- Page 67 ---
MATTERS.

The Devil's chief seat is our animal.                                 55.1
folio                               239.15  The proper differences of things are to us
God had commanded a goat to be sent out                                hidden.                                22.17
to the Devil, the accuser of the human race. 239.15          Bigamists indeed are not admitted to the priesthood,
The Devil, an evil demon, the ancient serpent,      unless dispensed by the Roman pontiff.
Azazel, or Asmodeus, is the lord            Prostitutes, however, and effeminate men
of flesh and blood.                  386.6.  are admitted everywhere, even up to the pontificate, by priests.                    226.6
The Devil is venerated as a Deity among the Indians.                           354.5   Fingers are under the protection of Minerva. 120.29
Diapason contains two things to be considered.         Judges are called Gods in Exodus. 61.6
folio                               177.15  How diverse are the Gods among different
Diapason, the most consonant of all consonances.         nations. folio                             208.13
sonant.                       35.11   If there were two Gods, what would happen. 8.6
If there were two Gods, what would happen. 8.6

--- Page 68 ---
**INDEX**

[Column 1]

Is said to have chosen by the Gospel. 323.23
Some disciples of Christ obscured.
folio 357.8
Why the disciples of Christ were to be taught rather by the Holy Spirit than by Christ.
folio 385.4
Christian discipline is not usurped by human pride. 15.13
The discipline of Christ is imbued with clarity, and abhors all human pride.
folio 15.13
The discipline of Christ mocks the wise of this world who trust in themselves and their own strength.
folio 15.13
The discipline of Christ mocks teachers and the wise in themselves. 15.13.
The distinction between good and evil is not made by external senses. 360.11
Peter Lombard left a wide field for disputation to posterity, and paved the way.
folio 33.9.
Twofold progress of distinguishing/arguing. 113.19.
Dissimilar voices do not make dissonance, but harmony. 27.2
Dissonance of philosophers concerning the soul.
folio 28.4
Nothing dissonant made in man. 101.3.
What dissonance or consonance between body and soul, and whence it comes. 338.4
God revealed the mystery of diversity in man to few. 392.6.
Divine things are rather to be received from oracles than to be investigated by intellect.
folio. 403.3
What are divine goods. 281.20
Divine kinds participate wholly in the whole kinds of their predecessors. 93.13
All angels contemplate the divine essence immediately. 57.2
A certain artificial kind of divining and

[Column 2]

from experience. 372.3
Divination is not of fated things, as some say. 375.5.
Whether divination is of chance or fated things is asked by many. 375.5
By what arguments do those who deny it refute divination. 375.5
Aristotle's opinion on divination in the book "On Good and Bad Fortune." 375.5
The most hidden reasons of divine things are scarcely perceived over a long time, indeed, only by those inspired by the Holy Spirit. 14.12
Parmenides calls the knowledge of divine things true science. 195.10
Plato called divine light the Sun, but natural light the Moon. 30.6.
Divine number 27. folio 97.18.
What causes the increase of riches.
folio 82.31
Riches are called, says Marcus Varro, because they make us divine and lacking nothing.
folio 276.12
Threefold way of teaching among the Peripatetics.
folio 165.2
Those who wish to become learned and wise must first become lovers. 57.2
Teachers teaching pestilential doctrines are food of death. 158.32
The doctrine which Christ taught us.
folio 271.9
The doctrine of Christ, always denied to the wise of this world and the prudent and the powerful, but revealed to little ones and humble simpletons. 272.9
The doctrine of Christ is supremely true. 254.7
First instruction for rendering thanks to God. 398.15.
Second instruction, which. 398.15.
Third instruction, which. 398.15.
Fourth instruction, application and ad-

--- Page 69 ---
MATTERS.

[Column 1]

Kiss of God 398.15
Fifth document: union with God.
folio 398.15
New dogmatizers, who 259.12
Pain arises from things we do not want. 62.6
The varied and wonderful condition
of ruling and operating 379.9
How the power of ruling was lost to man,
and restored 378.8
What legitimate power of ruling. 381.10
Dominations, like architects, command,
folio 439.2
Dominations, to interpret the freedom of the mind. 61.5
Ten properties of Dominations. 61.6
Correspondence of Dominations and Jupiter.
folio 61.6.
The power of treading upon serpents, and
scorpions, and upon all the power of the
enemy, remained so long in the successors
of the apostles, as long as they could say, "silver
and gold I have none." 379.8
The dominion given to Christ by the Father and
the pre-definition of time are explained by oracle 326.25.
The power of casting out demons and other
harmful things was in Christians for so long,
as long as they remained faithful as disciples.
folio 379.8
What Ezekiel reports he saw of the Lord,
in the likeness of shining amber above
the loins, but below, of burning fire, signifies. 413.17
The Lord of flesh and blood and of evil
man, Azazel or Asmodeus.
folio 386.6
How "The Lord smelled sacrifices" is to be
understood 240.15
The Lord is said to be many things. 413.17
The Lord, greater than all praise 399.16

[Column 2]

The Lord makes all evil that is in the city. 256.9
The Lord says, "I am creating evil."
folio 256.9
The Lord, however, does not create punishment. 256.9.
The Lord God, the best, makes all evil,
because he made a changeable nature.
folio 256.9
The twofold House of God 304.6
The heavenly house and family is divided.
folio 436.1
What the Israelite house is by allegory,
folio 304.7
Christ is the head of the dragon and the devil:
and not another, nor another thing. 280.18
Whence the most dreadful dragon originated. 299.3
The defeated dragon brought in a threefold
battle line against us. 454.1
What Dorylaus the Pythagorean thinks of the world 163.1
Sweet and at the same time oily things serve under Venus 80.28
The number twelve, a very mystical number.
folio 113.19
The number twelve, consecrated to the gods and to the kinds,
and twice to those things which proceed from them. 113.19
Which two things are accustomed to flourish in lovers. 452.1
Eternal duration differs in nothing from God.
folio 17.14
Dion the Platonist in his book "On the Kingdom": "There
is no power except from God." 168.5

E

How "Behold how good and how pleasant" from the
psalmist is to be understood. 460.3
Echeneis, that is, the remora, has such a hidden
power that it can stop a ship 370.1
The Church is to be permitted to be called mother
rather by custom than by reason, lest contention
arise 266.2
The Church, the first spouse of Christ, formed
f ij

--- Page 70 ---
INDEX

[Left Column]

from the rib of love 266.2
The Church, in which it imitated Simon.
   page 308.12
The Roman Church praised by all.
   page 314.17
The Church Militant, which. 457.1
The Church, wife, formed from the side of Christ
   sleeping on the cross 266.2
The Church is nothing but a certain relative
   aggregation of the faithful. 266.2
The Church cannot be a mother, since it consists
   of an aggregation of those being regenerated,
   who, when they are reborn, are sons, and not
   a mother. 266.2
The Church, men gathered in the Holy Spirit,
   not a building, not a possession of benefices,
   or dominion over temporal things.
   page 144.18
The Roman Church will endure until the second
   coming of Christ 314.16
The Maronites observe the Roman Church, with
   only the idiom excepted. 314.17
Bread best represents the body of the Church.
   page 230.

[Right Column]

E

"Behold how good and how pleasant" from the
   psalmist, how it is to be understood. 460.3
Echeneis, i.e., the remora, has such a hidden
   power that it can stop a ship. 370.1
The Church, rather by custom than by reason,
   lest contention arise, is to be permitted
   to be called mother. 266.2
The Church, the first wife of Christ, formed

--- Page 71 ---
CONTENTS.

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

--- Page 72 ---
IN DEX

*   Epicarmus Sphaerus agrees about ideas with Timaeus & others. 192.7
*   Epicurus thought God was clothed in human form. 4:2
*   Causes of Epilepsy. 116.23
*   How Ephraim is interpreted. folio 318.19
*   Epimenides, a divine man, predicted to the Athenians ten years in advance that the Persian fleet would come. 372.3
*   Epimenides was a Coan prophet. 374.4
*   Epithalamium for marriage. 452.1
*   Epithalamium of the groom, which. 451.1
*   Epithalamium for the bride. 451.1
*   Who should sing the Epithalamium. 450.1
*   What an Epithalamium is. 450.1
*   Certain epithalamia called the Song of Songs because of their excellence. 450.1
*   Epithalamia which Solomon composed, approved by Isaiah, therefore to be kept. 450.1
*   From where the Bishop is named. 459.3.
*   Fight on horseback.

--- Page 73 ---
**CONTENTS.**

[Column 1]

*   *ligemia* ... 94.14
*   Palamedes invented the order of the army, the giving of signals, watchwords, and watches in the Trojan war ... 19.14
*   "Depart from your land," in Hebrew it is found, "Go to yourself" ... 109.15
*   To wait until Socrates knows something.
    *   folio ... 359 9
*   Outside of a place, nothing pertains to that place.
    *   folio ... 19.15
*   Outside of time, nothing relates to time ... 19 15
*   Ezekiel and John divide the heavenly city ... 422.1
*   Ezekiel divides the temple, but John does not ... 422.1
*   Ezekiel's varied reading where he says, "The appearance of the Ophanim as the vision of a beryl stone, etc." ... 58.3
*   The author's reading of Ezekiel's vision differs greatly from the common one ... 57.3
*   Ezekiel's admirable oracle. 57.3
*   Ezob, which they interpreted as hyssop because of the proximity of the word, is truly frankincense and not hyssop ... 153.27
*   Ezob is to be interpreted in Hebrew as rosemary and not hyssop. ... 82.31

**F**

*   How and with what glue the fabric of the city is compacted and united. 428.2
*   The ideal structure in the mind of the artisan. 7 5
*   Daedalus invented the working of materials.
    *   folio ... 19.14
*   The face of the bilious Martials. 118.25
*   The reason for a deed is the power of the doer. 392.6
*   A horrible crime to follow Aristotle rather than Paul in demonstrations ... 22.17
*   Those who prognosticate are often mistaken. 41.8
*   The apostolic and Israelite family is distributed by the number twelve.

[Column 2]

*   The apostolic and Israelite family is distributed by the number twelve. 305.7.
*   The human family made a two-way path in Abel and Cain ... 428 2
*   The family restored in Seth. ... 428.2
*   What a butterfly is ... 402 1
*   Fates cannot be prevented. 375.5
*   Those things are called Fates which seem to happen to us by the disposition of the heavens. 375 5
*   That there is divination of fatal and fortuitous events ... 375.5
*   Fate is disposition. ... 439.2
*   Fate is the disposition of seven intelligences.
    *   folio ... 192.7
*   What Fate is ... 192.7
*   Fas, in Greek *themis* ... 92.11
*   Favor: how by a short path we can draw favor from heaven, angels, and God.
    *   folio ... 343.9
*   The matter and cause of quartan fever.
    *   folio ... 116.23
*   Leaven signifies malice 236.13
*   The Idaean Dactyls discovered iron in Crete ... 19.14.
*   Iron is sharpened by iron ... 344.10
*   "Let there be light," is read erroneously for, "Let there be light."
    *   folio ... 410.14
*   That faith alone suffices for salvation not only had its authors in this age, but also among the most ancient Hebrews, who were called Rabbis, asserted it ... 258.11
*   Some assert that faith pertains to the inner man and nothing else; but works pertain to the outer. 259.11
*   Some assert that faith cannot subsist with works ... 258.11
*   Christ, the author and end of faith 282.1
*   The great controversy of faith and works.
    *   folio ... 259 12
*   Our faith is the victory that conquers the world.

f iiij

--- Page 74 ---
**INDEX**

| Left Column                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

--- Page 75 ---
MATTERS.

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

--- Page 76 ---
INDEX

| Fundamenta duodecim unico fundamen- to innituntur 445. 4 | Forma & species quæ sit eorum qui præ- esse dicuntur 63.7 |
| :---------------------------------------------------------------- | :---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Funus & eius ceremoniæ ad quid institu- tum 225.6               | Formam & esse specificum ab ideis ha- bemus 195.10             |
| Furor quid sit 373.4                                            | Formam educi de materia, nisi sententia Anaxagoræ sit vera, Quodlibet in quolibet esse, vix intelligi potest. folio 195.10 |
| Fusum in lanificio Closter Arachnes fi- lius tornauit 19.14    | Formarum dator si Deus est, formas in eo esse necesse est. Formæ autem in Deo existentes sunt ideæ de quibus Plato 195 10 |
| Futurorum præsentio ad Deos spectat. folio 372.3               | Fortuita & casus nulla Deo sunt. 375.5                          |
| Franciscus inter nouitiores Theologos insignis Aristotelem de ideis refellit. folio 194.9 | Fortuita & euenta atque casus non ra- tione Dei, quorum causa est ipse, sed ratione eorum quibus accidunt. 375.5. |
| Fructus qui Venerei 80.28                                       | Fortuita à casu videntur hominibus, cum tamen à Diuino decreto summa ratio- ne procedant 375.5 |
| Fructus domus in qua Christus regnat. folio 303.6               | Fortuitorum nulla præsentio 375 5                              |
| Fructus plures ex actiua, quàm ex con- templatiua uita 303.6   | Fons pater 139.13                                               |
| Fructus omnes ab eadem arbore proce- dant quomodo 445.4        | Fons filius 139.13                                              |
| Fructus utrarumque arborum contracti sunt ex trangressione primi parentis folio 355.6 | Fons in medio paradisi quid signet. folio 147.22 |
| Fructus conuiuij cælestis qui 445.4.                            | Fontes quid 139.13                                              |
| Fructus cur ultra pœnitentiam requiran- tur 259.12             | Fontes saluatoris qui sint 139.13                               |
| Fructus boni sunt partus matrimonij. folio 442.4                | Fontes tres sunt unus fons 202.2                                |
| Frugalitas nunquam contemnenda.                                | Fontes Elim qui 320.21.                                         |
|                                                                 | Fontes Apostoli dicti 321.20                                     |
|                                                                 | Fundam reperit Æneas 19.14                                      |
|                                                                 | Fundamenta utriusque familiæ prophe- tæ & Apostoli sibi invicem correspon- dentes sunt in ciuitate excelsa. 439.3. |
|                                                                 | Fundamenta machinæ mundialis quadri- faria 423.3                |
|                                                                 | Fundamenta omnia quaternaria iacien- da. folio 50.13           |
|                                                                 | Fundamentum universale Christus. 429.3                          |
|                                                                 | Fundamentum supernæ ciuitatis ex au- ro. folio 416.1...        |

--- Page 77 ---
**MATTERS.**

**[Left Column]**

folio 380.9
Genadius, a priest of Marseille, enumerated ninety-one illustrious men beyond those collected by St. Jerome.
folio 33.9
The supreme moderator willed various kinds of men in the human republic, and likewise of brutes. 352.4
He is called generating and producing, who brings form into actuality. 37.13
Generation is terminated at the individual.
folio 18.14
The generation of one is the corruption of another.
An unbelieving and perverse generation seeks a sign. 332.7
Generations and corruptions of things succeed each other by that revolution by which the heavens revolve. 59.3
The Platonists present double genii.
folio 344.9
No nation, no kind of men so barbarous, that it does not have some anticipation of God without doctrine.
folio 5.3
The Gentiles worshipped men as Gods, whom they believed to have been carried up into heaven. 108.14
They consecrated knees to Mercy.
folio 120.29
How the human race is led to God himself. 173.10
The human race has always been bipartite.
folio 159.34
That the human race is divine. 349.1
Geometric mean relates to the multitude of substances. 91 11.
By what methods geomancers prophesied.
folio 372.3
Christ taught geometry. 275.11.
Who the Gersonites are, and how they interpret. 323.22

**[Right Column]**

Gessem is interpreted as rain. 135.9
What Gion is. 148.22.
Gion is thought to be the Nile. 149.22
What ice and crystal are. 145.19
Ice and crystal are frozen water. 145.20
Ice holds the image of the sinner.
folio 145.20.
The Lacedaemonians invented the sword.
folio 19.14
The globe of the heavens, the first instrument of harmony. 446.1
The glory of the blessed is about an infinite object. 426.3
Glory and beauty are in the contemplation of God. 432.2
Daedalus discovered glue. 19.14
By what means we can attain the degree of knowledge prepared for us.
folio 358.9
Hidden degrees are in musical unity.
folio 351.2
Distinct degrees of knowledge in men.
folio 356.7
The Greeks, like apes, imitated the Hebrews. 285.4
The Greeks received letters from the Phoenicians.
folio 2.1
Greeks and Hagarenes brought back to the church.
folio 314.17
Greeks cursed by Eugenius, and why.
folio 314.16
Sublime and high-sounding speculations of Greece reached the Italians. 47.10.
Regions of Greece, in which the study of human letters flourished. 318.20
Four principal doctors of the Greeks, as also of the Latins. 35.9
The venerable opinion of the Greeks, which.
folio 325.24

--- Page 78 ---
**INDEX**

[Left Column]

The Greeks received letters from Cadmus a little before the destruction of Troy 18.14
The Greek idiom immediately from Hebrew. folio 209.13
What hail and snow signify. 144.18
Hail, snow, are reckoned in God's treasury. 144.18
Grateful people are found more praising God than uttering something unworthily. folio 467.1
It was pure grace of God that He sent His son 263.14.
Divine grace and charisms were imparted to us through JESUS 130.6.
Christ gave us the grace of working well 431.1
Gregory and Nazianzen explain both the letter and the sense hidden beneath the surface. 33.9
God created seven governors of the world 438.2.
Typhis first invented the rudder. folio 19.14

**H**
Inhabitants of the eastern islands are not bound by the Mosaic law, s.

[Right Column]

Gessem is interpreted as rain. 135.9
What Gion is. 148.22.
Gion is thought to be the Nile. 149.22
What ice and crystal are. 145.19
Ice and crystal are frozen water. 145.20
Ice holds the image of the sinner. folio 145.20.
The Lacedaemonians invented the sword. folio 19.14
The globe of the heavens is the first instrument of harmony 446.1
The glory of the blessed is about an infinite object 426.3
Glory and splendor are in the contemplation of God 432.2
Daedalus invented glue. 19.14
By what means we can attain the degree of knowledge prepared for us. folio 358.9
Hidden degrees are in musical unity. folio 351.2
Distinct degrees of knowledge in humans. folio 356.7
The Greeks, like apes, imitated the Hebrews. 285.4
The Greeks received letters from the Phoenicians. folio 2.1
Greeks and Hagarenes brought back to the church. folio 314.17
The Greeks cursed by Eugenius, and why. folio 314.16
Sublime and high-sounding speculations of Greece reached the Italians. 47.10.
Regions of Greece in which the study of humanities flourished. 318.20
Four principal doctors of the Greeks, as also of the Latins. 35.9
The venerable saying of the Greeks, which... folio 325.24...

--- Page 79 ---
**CONTENTS.**

[Left Column]
The Hebrews falsely boast that the guardianship of angels
was given to them alone by God.
folio 170.7
The Hebrews establish the difference between soul and spirit
in man. 385.3
Hebrew scholars collected 72 names of God. 286.6
By what names the Hebrews call those three things in man. 385.3
Certain learned Hebrews born by divine law. 354.5
Hebrew scripture has concerning Abraham "go to yourself,"
where we have "go out from your land." 109.15
The mystery of Hebrew letters, that all things return
from one and into one.
folio 167.3
A huge and numerous catalog of Hebrew writers. 30. & 31.7
The various opinion of the Hebrews concerning Christ.
folio 298.2
The kings of the Hebrews consulted their prophets
in difficult matters. 372.3
What happened to Hecuba bearing Paris in her womb. 169.6
Hellanicus, Philochorus, Castor, Thales,
and Alexander Polyhistor, and Diodorus
proclaimed very ancient remarkable things, and concerning Moses, a most
excellent leader. 2.1
The heliotrope stone prevents its wearer from being seen. 420.4
How Enoch was translated. 462.1
The liver, the primary organ of blood. 117.24
By what blood the liver is nourished. 117.24
By what note Plato's heptachord was inscribed. 90.9
Heraclides Ponticus says that God is sometimes the world,
sometimes the mind, and attributes divinity to the wandering
stars. 4.2
Heraclitus Ponticus, a student of Plato. 169.6

[Right Column]
Heraclitus, what concerning sacrifices. 394.10
Why Heraclitus was not understood by philosophers,
according to Jerome. 36.12
Moonwort. 82.30
Herbs which are Venereal. 80.28
The correspondence of herbs with the heavens, especially with Jupiter. 76.20
Herbs which follow the sun. 79.27
Virtue is inherent in herbs and metals not from primary
qualities. 76.20
What Hermes Trismegistus says about the Egyptians. 5.2.
Hermes, Zoroaster, Charondas, Ostanes,
Zalmoxis, the Brahmans, the Gymnosophists,
considered astronomy useful for medicine. 379.9
Hermes wrote about the consonance of certain planets
and stones and herbs. 24.18
Hermippus, a Pythagorean, what concerning the Academy. 3.1
How Hermon is interpreted. 300.4
What Hermon is interpreted as. 394.9.
How Hermon is interpreted. 460.3.
Hermon, what. 144.18
Heshon in Hebrew signifies thought.
folio 141.15
Hesbon, what. 291.8
Hesiod and Linus took the opportunity of writing poetry
from the Hebrews. 3.1
Hesiod and Orpheus, what concerning the creation of the world. 9.8
Hiarchas, prince of the Brahmans, what he thinks about the
work of God, and about this world. folio 33.10.
Hiarchas and Apollonius asserted transmutations of men
even into beasts. 26.1.
How Hicabru is interpreted. 311.14.
Hidekel, i.e., Tigris, what. 148.22.
Hierocles, interpreter of Pythagoras, how much he attributed
to the quaternary. 51.15
g

--- Page 80 ---
I N D E X

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Hædi typici mysterium 244.19
Hæma quomodo interpretatur. 328.1
Homerum quanti fecerit Anaxagoras
& Basilius 48.10
Homerus & Hesiodus fuerunt, ut ait
Cicero, centesimo quinquagesimo post
Troiam euersam 2.1
Homerus undè habuit ut caneret de se-
ptima luce 3.1
Homerus ait non esse bonam Deorum mul-
titudinem 7.6
Homicida non esse in usu Hebræorum
ideo in Euangel. Ioannis legendum oc-
cisor & non homicida ab initio.
folio 61.6.
Hominem Deo dilectum simplicia quæ
faciant. 82.31
Hominem stabilem cur non fecerit Deus.
folio 392.6
Hominem bifarium Plato asseruit. 360.11
Homines qui transmutati uiui sint. 401.
Homines efficiuntur dij, secundum Ari-
stotelem. quomodo 348.13
Homines qui, cum angelis fuerint loquu-
ti. folio 71.13
Homines qui in animalia transmutati.
folio 108.14
Homines qui immutandi sunt in iudicio.
folio 407.10.
Homines à legibus corporeis absoluti a-
liquando ad locum quendam dedu-
cuntur. 463.2
Homines qui rapti iudicia de futuris discer-
nunt, uident sphæras cælorum. 463.2
Homines quando rationem Astrorum
cognoscunt, & intelligunt rerum cau-
sas. folio 463.2
Homines aliqui reperiri qui commerciũ
uenereum habeant cum cacodæmoni-
bus. folio 386.6 |
| Hierocles, interpreter of Pythagoras 9.8
Hierocles' opinion on charity. 347.12
Jerome's book on the ten names of God
to Marcella 286.6
Jerome brought a most fierce lion, an enemy,
into his own service. 377.7
Jerome and Rufinus of Aquileia,
what about the resurrection of men. 408.11.
Jerome grieves that our translation
has "instaurare" instead of "recapitu-
lare" in the Epistle to the Ephesians. 199.17
What Hierotheus says about JESUS.
folio 283.2
Hierotheus entrusted secret mysteries to Dionysius
the Areopagite and not Paul.
folio 55.1
How Jerusalem is interpreted. 304.6.
What Immanuel is. 186.2
The Salaminians find a horse-transport ship. 19.14
Hippocrates prognosticates diseases, recovery, and death
from the aspects of the Moon with other
planets. 49.11
Hippocrates teaches his son Thessalus the
symmetry of man. 101.3
Hippocrates of Cos, the first of all to reduce
medicine to precepts. 18.14
Whence Hippocrates. 313.16
The goat's beard is not devoid of mystery.
folio 242.18
A goat was offered for sin. 242.18.
A goat in the 13th degree of Gemini. 82.31
Spaniards, called "accincti" or "expediti," give
eloquent words of beauty. 320.20
In which part Spain produces timely fruits.
320.20
Where Spain is situated. 319.20
"This is my name," how it should
be understood. 286.6
When a true burnt offering is. 391.5
What a burnt offering is. 233.12 | The mystery of the typical kid. 244.19
How Hæma is interpreted. 328.1
How highly Anaxagoras and Basil
esteemed Homer. 48.10
Homer and Hesiod were, as Cicero says,
one hundred and fifty years after
Troy was overthrown. 2.1
Whence Homer had it to sing of the
seventh light. 3.1
Homer says that a multitude of Gods is not good.
7.6
"Homicida" (murderer) not being in use among the Hebrews,
therefore in the Gospel of John, "occisor"
(slayer) should be read and not "homicida" from the beginning.
folio 61.6.
What simple things make a man beloved by God.
82.31
Why God did not make man stable.
folio 392.6
Plato asserted man to be twofold. 360.11
Men who were transformed alive. 401.
How men become gods, according to Aris-
totle. 348.13
Men who have spoken with angels.
folio 71.13
Men who were transformed into animals.
folio 108.14
Men who are to be changed in judgment.
folio 407.10.
Men freed from bodily laws are some-
times led to a certain place.
463.2
Men who, rapt, discern judgments about future things,
see the spheres of the heavens. 463.2
When men recognize the reason of the Stars,
and understand the causes of things.
folio 463.2
Some men are found who have venereal
commerce with evil spirits. folio 386.6 |

--- Page 81 ---
**CONTENTS.**

| Left Column                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

--- Page 82 ---
**INDEX.**

[Left Column]

Man becomes a prophet. 372.3
What symbol and what harmony Man has with angels. 363.1
Man is cleansed by alms. 395.11.
Man holds the middle place between God and this world. 100.2
What Man receives from Saturn. 111.17.
What Man receives from Jupiter. 111.17
What Man receives from Mars. 111.17
Man badly educated, a most ferocious animal. folio 46.8
Man endowed by God with fear and love, by which he may be feared and revered. folio 378.8
Why Man is marked with a character. folio 428.2
Man has something of divinity more than other living beings. 189.3
At what age Man becomes fit for procreating according to the flesh and according to the spirit. 175.11
What Man receives from angels. 123.32
Man, the temple of God, is harmonized with God. folio 123.33
Just as Man falls away from God through sin, so through penitence he is led back to God. folio 393.8
Man by nature emulates God. 387.1
Man made with the image of God. 387.1
Man is transformed by ecstasy and trance. folio 399.18
Man, the most perfect image of the world. folio 91.10
Man, the most perfect work of God. 389.3
Man alone among living beings rejoices in this honor, that he may interact with all things. 91.10
What commerce Man has with the angelic spirit. 385.5
Man manifests virtues. 395.12
Man, an animal of a corruptible nature. folio 386.8

[Right Column]

Whether Man always uses his inner senses. 362.12
Man can know all things through a certain succession, and not like God by a single act. 388.1
Man, who is called a plant. 108.14
How Man is at variance with sin. 393.7
Evil Man, diabolical. 386.6
Man is expiated by sacrifices. 394.10
Man, a certain all, and a certain whole in everything. 103.5
How Individual Man, living by rule, returns to God. 174.11
Man is not reborn by water and the word of the priest, but by heavenly water. folio 268.4
Man imitates the world in circular form. folio 100.2
Man, the last work of God, who was first in the divine mind and nobler. folio 364.2
When Man will be led to perfection by God. 401.1
Man constituted by God as lord of all. folio 103.6
Good-hearted Man is heard. 381.11
By what ways Man is nourished. 246.21.
Man, the most beautiful work of God. 97.17.
What agreement Man has with the spirit of God. 385.4
Man among the Hebrews in sacred texts is called Adam, Enos & גבר. 395.11..
Man, twice divine. 395.12
Man subject to sin needs purification. 337.3
Man lives through all degrees of life. folio 102.5
Man alone, well-attuned, lives joyfully with God. 382.12
Man alone is heavenly among living beings. 103.6

--- Page 83 ---
**TOPICS.**

**[Left Column]**

Man, a lesser world, far greater than the greater world in virtue. 99.1
Man cannot pass to a better life unless he dies to this animal life. folio 236.13
Man deceived by ignorance and fragility. 146.21
Man, how he may be well tempered, what proportion of humors one to another ought to be. 103.6
Man returns to God through prayer. 399.16
Man is united with God by love. 399.17
Man, he images the archetype in form. folio 388.1
Man is not able for any good work without divine favor. 168.5
Man desiring to become divine, what he ought to do. 387.8
Man, the most perfect of all living beings. folio 16.13
Man, according to the opinion of the Peripatetics, consists only of body and soul. folio 385.3
Man receives twofold increments. folio 345.10
Man is introduced by contemplation. folio 399.16
Man, whether he is superior to angels. 363.2
Man, whence he can modulate, has from reading. 396.12
Man, if he governs himself well, has God within him, as even the writings of the pagans testify. 371.2.
Man sings in harmony with angels. 122.32
Man, why he is cast down from his state and rectitude. 338.3.
Man, why he falls short from the degree of knowledge. 357.8
Animal man desires to be blessed with the spiritual man.

**[Right Column]**

...blessed. 301.4
Man, made, potentially nobler than angels. folio 364.2
Man, who is called a stone. 108.14
Man, what he can receive from the heavens to be better. 367.6
Man draws light from heaven. 367.6
Man draws many things from the 7 planets. 367.6
Man receives great power from the harmony of the heavens. 367.6
Man, a small world, how he can receive nourishment from all the members of the greater world (to which he is most similar). 344.10
Man, well-instructed, becomes a tame animal. 46.8
Man, twofold, created by God. 300.4
Man performs a twofold work by means of the supreme portion. 385.3
Man, impenitent, when and how he comes to be. 385.3
Man, a dissolutory animal having no image of his own, has very many external ones. 108.14
Man exists as a twin God and demon, how this is to be understood. 348.13
Man has fourfold senses. 360.11.
Man preludes by meditation. 397.14
Man modulates by prayer. 398.15.
Man, why he is called a small world. folio 335.1.
Man, what symbol he has with the diabolical spirit. 386.6
Man sometimes has identity with the devil. 386.6
Man, what he has in common with the sacraments. 368.8
Man, what he has in common with angels. 368.3
Man, an earthly God, mortal. A God...

g iij

--- Page 84 ---
**INDEX**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

--- Page 85 ---
**SUBJECTS.**

[Column 1]

**I**
James the apostle, where he shines with miracles. folio 307.11
A javelin with a strap, invented by Aetolus, son of Mars. 19.14
Jacob, when the divinity of Christ was known. 331.7
Jacob received the name Israel, whence. folio 429.3
Jacob gave a name to his family, and so did Christ. 301.5
Jacob, what he used in blessing his sons. 316.19
Jacob, why he preferred the younger and placed the elder son after. 316.19
Jacob bore the type of Christ our father. folio 311.14
Jacob is interpreted as Israel. 301.5.
Yam Suph, that is, the bounded sea, or more truly, is interpreted as marshy. 142.16
Iamblichus, great priest of the Egyptians, in the volume concerning their mysteries, what about Pythagoras, Democritus, Plato, Eudoxus. 3.1
Iamblichus says that the knowledge of things given by God is confused by human opinions. 11.8.
Japheth signifies "enlarged" and "beautiful." folio 109.15
How Japheth is interpreted. 457.2
Double red jasper. 417.2
Jasper stops blood. 370.1
The virtue of jasper. 417.2
Seventeen kinds of jasper. 417.2
Black jaundice, whence it arises. 116.23.
The idea of things to be made, the artistry in divine wisdom. 193.7
What ideas are. 191.6
Ideas have their being more perfectly in God than in their own kind. 350.1
Ideas celebrated by Plato and by the doctors of sacred letters.

[Column 2]

doctors of sacred letters. 21.16
Ideas of virtues in God. 197.13
Multiple ideas. 191.6
Ideas are relations to the ideata, as God to creatures. 194.9
Ideas are of perfect beings and immutable motions. 192.7
Ideas indicate the true essences of things. folio 464.3
Plato's ideas are not monsters. 12.9.
What utility ideas provide us. folio 195.10
Ideas are eternal. 403.3
Ideas manfully defended by Syrianus. 21.16
Relative ideas. 193.8
How ideas are understood by the author. folio 196.12.
Ideas are nothing other than cognitions of things. folio 24.18
Ideas are exemplars of things to be made in the first intellect. 24.18
So great is the power of ideas, according to Augustine, that unless they are understood, no one can be wise. 195.10
The supporters of ideas do not propose anything ridiculous, as Aristotle and his followers falsely claim. 194.9
More authors of ideas than Peripatetics. 190.4
The seal of ideas. 420.4
The equivocal name of ideas. 191.6.
Who rejected ideas, and for what reason. folio 193.8
The reasons by which those denying ideas are supported. 193.8
The reasons of those denying ideas are not reasons, but most certain errors. 193.9
The dogs of those denying ideas. 193.9
Why Augustine mocked ideas. 50.12
That ideas exist, not only Platonists, but also g iij

--- Page 86 ---
**INDEX**

[Column 1]

That Ideas exist, not only Platonists, but also all
Catholics & Christians assert. folio 192.7
How God uses Ideas. 195.9.
Identity dominates in universals.
folio 92.11.
Heavenly inhabitants will speak in the Hebrew
idiom, & why. 447.2
The identity of existence in the craftsman is declared by
musical proportion. 91.11
Who makes an idol of himself. 383.12
How all letters of the four-letter name are contained
in the name Judah. 458.
Judah, who is interpreted. 303.6
The royal scepter given to Judah. 314.17
Fasts that are to be undertaken. 338.4
Jeremiah touches upon lamentations in a tragic song.
181.19.
Some said Jeroboam was the Messiah,
which is false. 297.1
Swords raging in the sky, the noise of the temple
gates, with no one moving them, preceded the destruction of Jerusalem. 371.1
Lightning, which like midday surrounded the temple
for half an hour, foretold the overthrow of Jerusalem.
folio 169.6
Many portents, as Joseph relates, preceded the
subversion of Jerusalem.
folio 169.6
Jerusalem signifies a vision of peace. 158.33.
What Jerusalem, Zion, and the temple signify. 158.33
Where Jerusalem is. 322.22
Jerusalem is called a vision of peace. 428.2.
In the name of JESUS, human & divine things are
included. 288.6
Why the name of JESUS is invoked today by true
worshippers of God. 289.8
Who the Jesuanis are. 428.2
JESUS is said to have been the completion of
our operations. 295.12

[Column 2]

JESUS will reign in the house of Jacob forever,
why it was said by an angelic oracle.
folio 301.5
What the four-letter name JESUS signifies. 289.7
JESUS, the beginning, & the first, the end
& the last. 289.7
Triple fiery virtue: in the microcosm, the heart;
in the angelic, the seraph; in the first mover, that which seizes. 116.22.
Poets called fire Jove. 48.10.
Pyrodes, who was the son of Silex, first struck
fire from flint. 19.14
Multiple fire, as Cleanthes discusses in a long
speech in Cicero. 410.14.
Almost all assert that fire is corporeal.
412.17
Fire, according to Pythagoras, is unique. 411.14
Whether that fire prepared from the origin of the world
is corporeal, God knows. 413.17
The difficulty of fire is resolved. 412.17
That invisible fire burning visible things.
folio 413.17
Corporeal & incorporeal fire. 412.17
The pyramidal figure of fire: four bases,
& as many angles. 54.17
Who is the fire of God? 270.7
That fire lives is not doubtful, since life is a
kind of fire, & proceeds from fire.
folio 204.6
The agreement of fire with the sun & Mars.
folio 74.17
The spirit of fire purifies hearts. 129.4
Why fire is applied to funerals & all sacred rites.
74.17
Fire is said by some to be so called because nothing
is begotten from it. 74.17
Fire is most fertile because all things are begotten by
the heat of fire. 74.17
Fire indicates the strength & love of God. 68.11

--- Page 87 ---
MATTERS.

Ignorant evil person, as the Peripatetics say. 459.3
He who strikes, he heals. 112.18
He was a murderer from the beginning, better perhaps a slayer, because among the Hebrews "homicida" is not in use. 61.6
They provoked, more truly they rebelled by the Red Sea. 142.16
Illustrious writers Jerome enumerates. 33.9
How much the imagination of the conceiver contributes to the likeness of the generator and the generated. 267.3
Strong imagination changes qualities in another's body. 339.5
Imaginative power in man for moving. folio 384.2
Prohibited images, lest through those idols, visible creatures be adored. 388.2
It is the nature of an image to represent the whole. 387.1
How the image of God is in man. 364.2
An image differs from a trace in this, that the latter represents a part, the former the whole. 123.33
An image differs from the imagined. 388.1
How the image of God is in man. 387.1
Uneven signifies form for philosophers. folio 37.13
The heavenly emperor has kings as fellow soldiers. 459.3
What the office of the Roman Emperor is, and where the election takes place. 311.14
The just rule of a prince. 458.2
The extensive rule of a prince. 457.2
Sharp impulse and fiery force signify choler. 102.4
What impiety is. 382.12
"He placed change in his angels" is interpreted variously by authors. 132.7.
"On the day when Adonai Elohim created the earth and the heaven," and not as our translation has it. 96.17

In Judea still flourishes a small spark of Christianity, and why. 311.14
In the creation of the world, all things were made at once. folio 35.10
"Their line went out into all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world," as the Hebrew text has it. 271.8
In sacred writings where mention is made of a lake, "bor," that is, the pit of hell, is found in Hebrew. folio 141.15
"In the beginning," that is, in wisdom or in the Word, God created heaven and earth. 191.5.
"In the protection of the God of heaven" is read. "In the shadow of Shaddai," among the Hebrews. 182.20
Incantations taught to men by demons, especially women. 379.9
Unbelief, the source of all sins. 252.5
How distributed individuals are. 352.3
Lycaon first made truces. 19.14
The individuation of a particular thing, from what it is distinguished. 74.17
An individual generates not by reason of essence, but by the generative power existing in the generator. 208.13
The priestly garments of the old law, in what way they pertain to the priests of Christ. folio 224.6
Excessive fasting to be avoided. 240.6
Lower things emulate higher things. 100.2
Lower things are images of higher things. 67.10.
Inferior beings are disposed by the rule of superior angels. 57.2
The ultimate end of all lower things is to serve. 13.11
Those adhering to the infinite always draw from it whence they may diminish. 465.3
Whence the infirmities of bodies. 337.3
Whence the beginning of the strength of the sons of Judah. 310.13
The beginning of our salvation, that we acquiesce to saving inspiration. 206.10

--- Page 88 ---
INDEX

[Left Column]

Innumerous passages of scripture which cannot be taken literally 35.10
That instant in which the world had its beginning, was the beginning of the subsequent, and not the end of past time 13.10
An instant of time has nothing in common with a point on a line. 13.10
The instant of the end of the past, and the beginning of the future 13.10
Cassiodorus interprets musical instruments in the scriptures 450.7
What those instruments mean, which are often mentioned in the Davidic hymns. folio 499.7
The most flourishing islands of letters, which. 313.16
Of the islands of the Nile (which are numerous), Meroë is the most famous 149 22
Absolute intellect, John [calls it] light, Augustine the higher part, Moses the breath of lives, although our edition has "of life" 93.13.
What Aristotle calls the active intellect, Proculus [calls] absolute intellect. folio 93.13
The intellect of God does not derive knowledge from a produced object, as ours does. 24.18
Our intellect derives knowledge from a produced object 24.18
The intellect of God is not moved by an object, nor perfected, nor does it beg, as ours does 24.18
The intellect of God does not fail by thinking and speculating on so many particulars, nor is it fatigued, as ours is, against the impious Averroes. 24.18
Intellect capable of all truths. 165.2
The passive intellect is so called 165.2
Whether the intellect always attains that which it could attain. 357.8
What is the separated intellect 14.3

[Right Column]

A good and sound intellect can [penetrate] into the secrets of nature, if the influence of divine power is present, says Aristotle in his more secret doctrines 371.2
Each intellect ordered according to its capacity 356.7
What intellect is and where it is 344.10
Intellect receptive of all intelligibles, and most desirous of truth. 165.2.
The passive intellect in man receiving all things 91.10
The active intellect in man produces all concepts 91.10
The intellect shows paths to the will. 115.22.
The intellect apprehends, but does not always comprehend 357.7
Triple intellect 364.2
What intelligence is 328.1
At least one intelligence presides over each sphere 94.14
The causative intelligence of God is nothing else but the word of God, through which all things were made. folio 192.7
The intelligences of individuals with whom they speak exercise tongues. 447.2
Inferior intelligences, called "lares" by Marcus Tullius. 38.14
Inferior intelligences are not only illuminated, purified, and perfected by superior ones, but also, it is known to us. 41.4.
Supreme intelligences agree with the prime mover 55.1
Divine intelligences are not moved while they move 25.18
The office of intelligences 420.4
The difference between supreme and inferior intelligences. 55.1
Inferior intelligences to be illuminated and purified by superior ones 55.1

--- Page 89 ---
**CONTENTS.**

[Column 1]
Supreme Intelligences are appointed only by God. 55.1
Aristotle thinks that Intelligences moving the spheres attain happiness in the perpetual revolution of the heavens. 13.11
John calls Supreme Intelligences spirits in the Apocalypse. 386.5
One entrance to life, and a similar exit. folio 355.6
He found a hundredfold in that very year, for which the Hebrew truth has something else. 457.2
What envy is. 364.3
Envy drew man into death. 146.21
Envy which is between men and angels. folio 364.3
John and Mercury named the Word of God offspring. 8.7
John named by an angel. 429.3
Why John does not express adornment as Ezekiel. 431.12
John discusses the true bride, not the figurative. 432.2
John's triumph concerning Asia. 456.4
Job's most elegant saying. 341.7
God says to Job, "Who will recount the voices of the heavens? And who will make the harmony of heaven sleep?" 163.1
Job, a holy and just man, asserts chiromancy to be most true. 102.4
Job begins in prose, proceeds in hexameter verses. 180.19
The entire work of Job, written in hexameters, was shown to the author of this book in Rome. folio 180.19
Job calls God light twice. 164. & 165.2
Yod signifies a denarius. 98.18
- Yod, the letter of divinity, signifying beginning and end. 383.1
The Ionian sect originated from Thales of Miletus. 128.4
How Jonah is interpreted. 292.9

[Column 2]
Jonah prefigured Christ in all things. folio 292.9
Interpretation of Jonah. 138.12
Ior signifies light. 149.23
How badly Joram succeeded, because he undertook war relying on his own strength. folio 168.5
What the Jordan is. 149.23
Joseph had Gabriel the archangel as a familiar. 363.1
How Joseph, son of Rachel, is interpreted. 303.6
Why Joseph, though inferior to Abraham, was endowed with blessing. 317.19
What Joseph received from his father apart from his brothers. folio 317.19
How Joseph, compared to the horns of a unicorn, is to be understood. 317.19
Josephus, Aristobulus, Tertullian & Eusebius, along with more than 40 foreign wise men, confirm the miracles produced by Moses and the world created by God. folio 9.8
One iota or one tittle of the law will not pass away, without being fulfilled in Christ. folio 250.4
What things are ruled by Jove. 78.25
Poets called Jove fire. 48.10.
What things are equal to Jove. 117.2.
In what Jovial ones delight. 114.20
What is the meaning of Jove. 63.7
Who are born under the star of Jove. 62.7
The sixfold proportion of Jove to Mars. folio 121.30
Where there is no anger, neither is there knowledge, nor do judgments stand firm, nor are crimes restrained. 48.10
What is irascibility. 344.10
Irascible in the heart. 110.16
Irene, daughter of Themis. 92.11

--- Page 90 ---
**INDEX**

[Column 1]

Iris stone reflects the most beautiful rays
   like a celestial rainbow 420.4
Isaiah prophesied concerning a prepared triumph
   455.3
Isaiah against those who rely on their own virtue.
   folio 168.5
Isaiah proceeds in a certain metrical order.
   folio 181.19
Ishmael and trouble 429.3
Isaac and Jacob were familiar with the angel Pelias
   363.1
Isaac not born according to the flesh. 439.1
Isaac published a book about definitions.
   folio 178.16
Isaac, the great mystery of blessing.
   folio 144.18
Isaac, second father of the chosen family.
   folio 300.4
Israel, which is interpreted as "he who has God as chief"
   7.6
Issachar, how it is interpreted 303.6
Issachar devoted himself to the study of letters. 313.16
Italy, praiseworthy for sanctity and all good
   arts
[manicule pointing right] Scripture calls the Italians Chittim. 2.1.
The Jewish people is called the son of vision,
   and why 311.14
The Jewish people, why it is compared to poured
   out water 311.14
The Jews are Calani from India, says Aristotle
   in Clearchus. 3.1
The Jews, how they were called Indians 3.1
Jews named from father Judah: Israelites from
   Jacob: Hebrews from the crossing 3.1
To the Jews, mixing and peace with Moabites
   and Ammonites are forbidden. 162.36.
The error of some Jews saying that Nebuchadnezzar
   was sent by God to Shiloh to punish their crimes.
   folio 296.1

[Column 2]

Judges are called Gods in Exodus. 61.6
Four judicial powers (says Hierocles) are
   intellect, discipline, opinion, sense 51.13
The last judgment, after how many years it will
   be. 406.6
Julius Firmicus calls Noah divine. 2.1
A beast of burden sometimes signifies an animalistic man
   171.7
Juno, how she helps mortals 208.13
Poets say Juno is air 48.10.
Jupiter has its own harmony with blood 114.20
Jupiter, balancing all things, claims the left ear
   117.24.
Jupiter is whatever you see, wherever you move
   37.12
Jupiter completes its course in twelve years
   121.30
Jupiter delights in fleshy, warm, moist parts
   117.24
Jupiter regards the natural virtue in the liver.
   116.23
Jupiter gives justice 44.7.
Jupiter completes its course in twelve years
   113.19
Jupiter begins love 117.24
Jupiter, with what harmony it imitates the properties
   of dominions 62.6
Jupiter, favoring love, equates the liver with the
   seat of love 117.24
Jupiter presides over the liver 117.14
Jupiter is adapted to dominions. 61.6
No one was justified by the works of the law.
   folio 263.14
Those who seek to be justified by works (as
   some say) worship Baal and kiss their hand
   258.11
No one is justified by the works of the law, nor
   has been justified 263.14

--- Page 91 ---
**MATTERS.**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

--- Page 92 ---
**INDEX**

By any law, men were not bound, except by that which was written in their hearts, until the command was published. folio 255.8
It is carefully stipulated by law that no image whatsoever should be made, neither of God himself, nor of heavenly beings. 388.2
By every law, resurrection is affirmed. 402.2
He who imposes law on others is not bound by law. folio 22.17
No one is justified by the works of the law. 240.15.
What a legion is, and of what it consists. 424.4
What a legion is. 438.1
New legions in every choir. 438.1
Christ is the end of the law. 259.11
The precepts of law and statute are observed only superficially today. folio 226.6
The diversity of law and gospel. 255.8
The Cyrenians found a skiff. 19.14
What a lemma is. 88.5
From where a lemma is derived. 93.13
The remarkable act of Leo the First Pontiff. folio 218.1
Martian leprosy, an infirmity. 80.28
For cleansing a leper, two birds were offered. folio 241.17
The mystery of cleansing lepers is described. 241.17
A hare gives birth twelve times a year. 113.19
How Levi is interpreted. 303 6
Why Levi was blessed by Moses, whom father Jacob had not wished to bless. folio 312.15
In the 7th chapter of Leviticus, certain things about bread are so confused that they are not understood. 245.20.
The law introduced by angels. 406.8
The law of the wise is the fountain of life. 139.13
Divine law is a garden planted with every kind of tree. 139.13
The law works the wrath of God. 255.8
The law is not evil, because through the law we know evil.

[Column 2]

The law is not evil, but bitter. 225.3
The law makes us err, that is, through the law we have all erred like sheep. 255.8
The law of death is the written law. 361.11
The strength of sin is the law. 255.8
Natural law, for whom it was sufficient. 354.5
The law was fiery. 249.3
Daedalus invented the level. 19.14
Book on formation published by Abraham. folio 95.16
Book of 32 paths among the more esoteric Hebrew theologians. 70.12
Why Aristotle and many others deny God the freedom of contingency. 16.13.
Freedom is not, as some think, a choice according to nature, indifferent to good or evil, but a choice for good according to one's own will. 16.13
Freedom degenerated in man, the most perfect of all. 16.13.
Libra rules the buttocks. 111.17
Libra, because then the sun divides days and nights equally. 112.18
Which regions are subject to Libra. 306.1
Which are the books of the former prophets. 437.2
The spleen is sparse, spongy, soft, so that it may attract that earthy, bilious dregs. 116. 23.
The Ligurian stone removes deceptive veils from the eyes. 370.1
How timbers are connected in a house. 428.2
Where the tree of life was placed. 424.4
Wood deprived of air immediately decays. folio 52.14
The first and last language of the Hebrews. folio 447.2
The human tongue as an instrument of harmony. 446.2
The Hebrew language emanated from heaven and before the Babylonian confusion. 447.2.

--- Page 93 ---
**CONTENTS**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

--- Page 94 ---
**INDEX**

[Left Column]

The lower moon, like a mother 81.30
The Moon, by what names in sacred rites. 182.21
What the Moon operates in the outer man,
the same do angels operate in both men 72.13.
The waxing Moon raises humors, the waning
Moon expels them, both in trees and in
human bodies 72.14
The Moon, sharing in the sun and earth 72.14
The Moon governs waxing and waning power 116.23
The Moon traverses twelve degrees daily. folio 113.19
The Moon, what gifts she bestows on mortals
folio 111.17
The Moon, over what she rules 81.30
The Moon, moderate temperance. 44.7
The Moon delights in variety among the stars,
the earth in this among the elements.
The Moon, as it were the wife of all planets.
folio 81.30
The Moon completes its course in eight or
twenty-nine days 56.1
The Moon's four phases, of what kind. 81.30
The Moon's distance to Mercury. 178.16.
Of the Moon and of the earth

[Right Column]
folio 37.12
How all created things originate by light.
folio 433.3
By light itself celestial citizens rejoice and
laugh 436.7
The light which other living beings receive
from man 434.4
Academics assert that the bleary-eyed
cannot behold light 434.4
Egyptians, inventors of lamps and textiles 18.14
The soul is an effect of light, which is
manifold 434.4
The functions of light according to diverse
subjects. folio 434.4
The character of light is imprinted in men.
folio 434.4
Lucretius treats all precepts of philosophy
in poems 48.
Lucretius disagrees not only with his fellow
students, but also with himself 26.1
Grief pertains to the animal man.
folio 151.26
The play of God with the world and with
the sons of men, of what kind 15.12
Solar and lunar light 357.8
What the greater and lesser luminary
signify 172.9
The Moon rules over all humors which
ascend and descend in both worlds, and
in trees, and animals. 120.29
The Moon draws down water by perpetual
attraction. folio 72.14
The Moon, which is moved 120.29
The Moon, leader of waters 114.26
The Moon, more a planet to others 71.13
What the Moon has in common with other
planets. 81.30
The Moon, called another Sun 80.30

b ij...

--- Page 95 ---
**CONTENTS.**

[Left Column]
Magi who were first called studied medicine. folio 379.9
Magi physicians considered astronomy necessary for medicine. 379.9
Pharaoh's Magi changed water into blood. 380.9
Pharaoh's Magi changed rods into serpents, summoned a multitude of frogs, to emulate Moses. 380.9
The Memphite Magi could not produce the matter of lice, as Moses did against Pharaoh. 9.8
The Asiatic Magi predicted Alexander, born, would be the ruin of Asia. 372.3
Magi who may be called wise and true philosophers. 380.9
The Magi confessed the finger and power of God to be present when Moses produced lice. 2.8
Magistrates who are lunar. 81.30
Great parent earth. 104.8
The power of the magnet, what it is. 370.1
The great difference of Magi, or of those working miraculously. 380.9
What Mahomet wrote in his theology concerning resurrection. 402.2
Mahometan

--- Page 96 ---
INDEX

[Left Column]

Mantia, a kind of frenzy which produces divine spirit 373.4
Manto, founder of Mantua 373.4
The hand of God is the spirit of God 283.2.
What are the golden hands of the bridegroom 451.1.
Marcus Tullius, what he says about God 5.3
When the sea will be agitated 406.6
Sea and waters, what they are 137.12
The sea, a collection of waters 137.12
The infinite sea and ocean is God himself.
folio 140.14
By what the sea is made fertile 137.12
What the Red Sea is 142.16.
Pearls are produced in shells in the Indian and British seas 52.15
Seas agitated by winds grow calm 410.14
Mary Magdalene in the solitude of Marseille was lifted up at fixed hours by the ministry of angels 374.4
What number the Hebrew name of Mary yields 89.6
How mystical Mary's childbirth is 254.6
Maro is preferred to others by the most learned Dante both in natural and moral philosophy 48.10
There are many kinds of marble 75 18
Mars bestows constant strength 44.7
Fiery Mars entirely has commerce with yellow bile 114.20
That Mars is not evil, nor any other star 47.10
What things are subject to Mars 78. & 79.26
What things are suitable for Mars 117.24
What things are strengthened by Mars 78.26
By what Martial people are delighted 114.20
Martial diseases 118.25
Double proportion of Mars to the Sun, Venus & Mercury 121.30
Evils emanating from Mars 45.8
What those born under the star of Mars do.

[Right Column]

folio 48.10
The harmony of Mars with intelligences which are called virtues 64.8
By what wine all martyrs are intoxicated 444.2
Maror among the Hebrews signifies bitter things, or a sharp taste, and not wild lettuce 244.19
From where male, female, and androgyne are generated 267.4
Why a male is conceived 267.4
Marsyas, inventor of the double pipes.
folio 18.14
Metatron, angel 359 10
A mother, if she wishes to have beautiful children, should have before her eyes an image of excellent and outstanding form 267.3
Prime matter is always passive 127.2
The matter of heaven is called by some the fifth essence 421.5
The matter of the heavens, alien from alteration. folio 47.9
The matter of the Empyrean heaven, purer than all.
folio 421.5
Matter cannot dispose itself.
folio 437.3
Unique matter in the lower regions 93.13.
Grosser and thicker matter is not from the matter of man 402.1
What the true matter of the supernal city is.
folio 420.5
Matter adverse to the first being 127.2
Prime matter, recipient of all species. 127.2
To what majesty prime matter sings in harmony.
folio 127.2
The production of matter, and matter produced, differs from the production of other things. folio 127.2
He called prime matter an unformed bosom, mother of the world, receptacle,

--- Page 97 ---
**MATTER.**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             

--- Page 98 ---
**INDEX**

[Left Column]

Fleece 118.26
Marrow of bones, life 118.26
Megasthenes in the third volume of Jewish affairs,
says not only Aristotle, but all philosophers
are disciples of Hebrew Wisdom 3.1
How Melchisedech is fitting for the Holy Spirit. 431.1
Melchisedech signifies a just king.
folio 230.10
Melchisedech greater than Abraham. 231.10
How Melchisedech is interpreted. 426.2
Members which are subject to Mercury. 120.28
Members of man which are fitting for Mars.
folio 117.25
As members of the human body differ by a great
distance, so also the members of the mystic (body).
folio 351.2
Human members often attributed to God in sacred texts:
head, eyes, nostrils, mouth, tongue, hand, etc. 124.33
All members of man are attributed to God.
folio 388.2
The members of God in sacred texts are His virtues.
folio 388.2
Members subject to the Moon 120.29.
Individual members which will be ours in
judgment. 409. & 410.13
Members and nerves of resurrected bodies
will redound to the praise of God according to
Augustine 448.3
Members which were previously deformed will be
restored in the resurrection 447.2
Harmony of the members of God and man. folio 124.34.
Memory receptive from God, so that Scotus did
not place it among the active (faculties). 116.23
Memory, a virtue only receptive and receiving,
as the Scotists say 116.23
Memory, recollection of past things. 387.1

[Right Column]

Saturn presides over memory 116.23
A lie has short feet. 247.1
Mind according to Mercury 438.2
The Mind, which is called God, most fertile,
which produced both inwardly and outwardly.
folio 8.7
Many judge the mind and intellect from the face,
that is, the countenance 102.4
The measure of God cannot be limited. 426.3
The same measure of angel and man 426.3
The measure of all things is made by one, and by the
denarius. 425.1
Measure of the city by John 426.3
Particular measure of the heavenly city
by Ezekiel 424.1
Measure of firstfruits and tithes. 425.2
Theodorus Samius (on) measures 19.14
Seven minds which are called the first separated
intellects 192.7
Angelic and blessed minds are resonant
instruments 449.5
Minds, both angelic and human, are assimilated
in receiving gifts. 94.14.
Human minds bear the image of the living God
15.12
Who the Merarites are, and how they are interpreted.
folio 323.22
How abundant reward (is given) 462.1
The Mercava of God or tribunal according to the
Hebrews 437.3
Harmony of Mercury with archangels.
folio 68.11
Columns of Mercury inscribed with all kinds
of doctrine 3.1
Mercury's excellent opinion, concerning the mind,
to his son 463.2
Mercury's nature is most difficult 72.15
Mercury's operation not as if his own,
but as the executor of another (to whom he is joined)
72.15

--- Page 99 ---
**CONTENTS.**

[Column 1]

A certain treatise ascribed to Mercury concerning the power of the stars. 82.3
What things are subject to Mercury. 119.27
Mercury, what concerning the fecundity of God. 17.13
Mercury Hermes, that is, is called the interpreter of offspring. 72.15
What Mercury does when conjoined with each of the planets. 72.15
What Mercury proposed to his son for consideration concerning beings. 345.10.
What that Mercury Trismegistus said concerning the knowledge of ourselves. 341.7
Mercury has double powers. 119.28
What Mercury accomplishes when conjoined with each of the planets. 69.12
Mercury published a treatise concerning the universal. folio 204.6
Michael the archangel presides over Mercury. folio 69.12
Mercury, interpreter of the law. 309.13.
The Phoenicians devised trade. 19.14.
Mercury the Thrice Greatest says all influences of the stars are good, indeed the best. 46.8
Mercury is in harmony with a more subtle spirit. folio 114.20
In what sense Mercury said one must beware of a man who had neither wife nor son. folio 109.15.
Mercury moves nothing unless joined with another star. 80.29
Mercury, disciple of Pymander, says: "Hitherto, son, driven from my homeland, I have lived," for he hoped for another homeland after death. folio 273.10
Mercury says concerning the universal, that there is nothing in the whole that is not God himself. 166.2
Mercury provides faith. 44.7
What Mercury did as he applied his mind to wisdom. 358.9
Mercury, with what words he introduces the speaking mind.

[Column 2]

463.1
That Mercury Trismegistus, having obtained the divine mind. 463.2
Mercury favors eloquence. 419.3
How Mercury was called thrice great. folio 459.3
Mercury, aqueous by nature. 73.15
Mercury, from merchandise. 73.15
Mercury, what he bestows upon men. 111.17
What Mercury says in his Pymander concerning the creation of the world. 9.8
Mercury seemed to hope for resurrection. 273.10
Mercury teaches God most rightly in Pymander. 192.7
With whom Mercury resonates. 80.29.
Mercurial people, slender. 119.28
With what gifts Mercurial people are enriched. folio 119.28.
"Mesilat" signifies a trodden path, for which we have a paved road. 141.15
Where Mesopotamia is situated. 318.20
How "Messi" is interpreted. 430.1
Why Messiah is called the son of David. folio 186.2
Messiah called by many names. 203.3.
Messiah became the one through whom we accomplish all things. 295.12
Messiah freed all from servitude. 354.5
Messiah did not take away the kingdom of Judah. folio 314.17
Metals, to consist of four elements. 52.14
Metals, although they consist of four elements, yet primarily of water. 52.14
What place metals have in the archetype. 130.6
To what metals correspond. 104.8
Metals have a symbol with Mars. 75.19
Which metals agree with which planets. folio 75.19

--- Page 100 ---
**INDEX**

Metals are aqueous, and they correspond to that supreme water. 130.6
Metals in man. 105.9
How and by what metals are generated. folio 52.14
Of what metals consist. 53.15
Metals which are subject to Venus. 80.28
Metals which are of Mercury. 80.29.
The imperfect life of metals. 104.9
How the generation of metals occurs in the earth. 104.9
That metal differs from metal, even of the same species, in weight. 53.15
The four elements of Metaphysics: essence, being, virtue, and action. 51.13
Michael fought against the enemy of the human race. 453.1
Michael contended for the body of Moses. folio 229.8
Michael sent to the aid of Gabriel. folio 439.2
The most valiant soldiers are in the heavenly homeland. folio 440.5
A thousand shields hang from it, how it is interpreted. 410.13
Nothing should be done against Minerva's will. 343.9
How "minimum" is interpreted. 450.7
The lesser supplants the greater, and what it means to subject. 300.4
Minorite friars (cord-bearers) or of the Franciscan family who differed in their manner of disputation up to Pisanus, one hundred. folio 33.9
You have made him a little lower, or a little less than God: and not from angels, as all Hebrew theologians truly explain. 364.2
Miracles which are true. 381.10
Metatron renders 999 in Hebrew characters, with great mystery. 88.6
Mithros or Mithras, the Persians call the sun. folio 21.16
Mizraim, that is, the Egyptians. 173.10
Moab and Hamon, begotten by father Lot lying with his daughters, bear the type of flesh. 162.36
Moabites and Ammonites born from the cohabitation of father and daughters. 162.36
Access to the temple is forbidden forever to Moabites and Ammonites. 162.36
The first mobile revolves in one rotation. folio 43.6
The first mobile harmonizes with the heart. 115.22
The first mobile contiguous with the Empyrean heaven. folio 56.1
What the two modes of understanding are. 359.10
No modulation without harmony. 395.12
The threefold mode of knowing among whom. folio 359.10
What soft things are with Venus. 119.27
Mercury discovered the monaulos. 18.14
The world is much more praiseworthy from harmony than from other things. 163.1
Whence monsters in nature. 21.17
By what causes monsters are produced. 22.17
Monsters are produced by two causes. 22.17
Jerome interprets "mountains of the age" as demons. 134.9
"The mountains exulted," should be read "leaped like rams." 134.9
Mountains are the pinnacles of virtues. 156.30.
By what mountains are elevated. 133.9
Delay brings danger, therefore let us hasten to enter rest, or because one must depart festively from this world. 245.19
Moral things to be acquired by practice. 11.8
What moral or allegorical means. 397.13
Diseases of those born under the sun. 118.26.
Diseases which arise from Mercury. 120.28.
Diseases which are generated from yellow bile. 118.25

--- Page 101 ---
MATTERS.

[Column 1]
Diseases which are Venereal 119.27.
What opinion many philosophers have concerning death 167.3
The custom of students of divine doctrine and also of philosophical doctrine 359.9
What is the custom of the homeland and family of those devoted to God 301.5
No writers preceded Moses, unless perhaps Abraham and Enoch. 2.1
Moses was intimate with the angel Metatron. folio 363.1
Moses, father of theologians, master of philosophers, what he said about the origin of the world. folio 9.8
Moses flourished three hundred ten years before the destruction of Troy 2.1
Moses, a most upright philosopher 102.5
Moses refuses to undertake the command of God, God thus decreeing: because human powers are entirely weak, unless the grace of God precedes. folio 82.32
Moses, entirely distrusting himself, does not wish to accept an angel as leader, but seeks God himself to go before as leader, saying, "Unless you come, I will not go." 82.32
Moses declared these foretold things not without great mystery 82.32
Moses, having refused all others, brought it about that God would dwell in the midst of the people, the tabernacle having been constructed 82.32
Moses is freed from the waters not by any chance, but God thus arranging, just as Joseph is freed, Saul is anointed king; thus all things, in my opinion, happen. folio 170.6
Moses, a most wise philosopher. 7.5
Moses had been commanded only that he should speak to the rock, and not that he should strike it. folio 129.5
Moses, in the creation of the world, always two-fold

[Column 2]
productions mentions 193.7
Moses irritates God, not fulfilling the command in striking the rock before the people. 129.5
Moses called an Egyptian priest by Strabo. 2.1
Moses bore the type of Christ 379.8
Moses of Cordoba 117.24
Moses indicates the knowledge of the law 243.18
Moses was in the times of Inachus and Ogyges. folio 2.1
Moses, in which places he confirms what he discusses concerning the created world 9.8
Moses, not Socrates, called wisdom from heaven 73.15
Moses the law-giver, when he spoke concerning the generation of man, twice described the production of Christ 296.1
Why Moses was not subject to infirmity. folio 338.3
Moses knew the nature of things. 359.10
Moses had a shining face: our translation has "horned." 432.1
Moses and Jacob spoke to God face to face 464.2
Moses performed miracles 381.10
Moses and Aaron numbered with those seventy 324.23
Most abundant witnesses to Moses' doctrine: Appian of Alexandria, Porphyry, Alexander Polyhistor, Eupolemus, Theophrastus, the Sibylline books, the Apollonian oracles, Clearchus the Peripatetic, Megasthenes, Strabo, Justin, Cornelius Tacitus, Demetrius of Phalerum, Hecataeus of Abdera, Orpheus, and Solinus 10.8
God had commanded Moses that he should speak to the rock 129.5
To Moses, when he was one hundred twenty years old,

--- Page 102 ---
INDEX

| | |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 103 ---
**CONTENTS.**

**[Column 1]**
Whoever will be a friend of this world, will be an enemy of God 273.10
The principles of the world, what pleased whom folio 28.3
Physicists believe that God began the creation of the world from the earth as from the center and mother of all 128.3
By the soul of the world all things are vivified. 93.13
Connection of the three worlds 131.7
Some taught many worlds, others a single one. folio 30.6
John mentions three worlds in the gospel, saying: He was in the world, and the world was made by him, etc. 100.1
Those who think the world uncreated, (believe) every product pre-existed in potential in matter. folio 11.9.
Those who consider the world eternal believe nothing is made from nothing 11.9
By what the created world is proven. folio 11.19
The world, which is one: some (believe it) originated, others (believe it) began, others (believe it) will perish, others (believe it) will always exist, others (believe it is) moved by divine mind, others (believe it is) moved by chance and accidents 30.6
That the world was not from the beginning, indeed not before the beginning, a most beautiful argument by the discoverers of things 18.14
Almost all ancients believe the world is an animal 33.10
That the world is the most beautiful work of God, Alcinous' opinion 9.8
Why the world was not made by God before or after what Moses narrates. 19.15
The world created in the month of September. 235.13
The world we inhabit contains the image of God, and man (is the image) of the world and the archetype. folio 100.1
The world (is) an animal, according to the opinion of some. 23.17
The world is dissolved according to its parts, so that

**[Column 2]**
it may persevere in a better state 13.10
Our world, a most bitter enemy. 273.10
The world (is) an animal, with Aristotle, Theophrastus, and Averroes as witnesses. 201.1
The world lived in the divine mind, as a work of art in the mind of the artist 7.5
The world (is) a certain animal, with Origen as witness. 201.1
The world will labor for six thousand years,
{ in the seventh millennium it will rest
{ and the age will end 405.6
The world (is) the work of the Holy Spirit. 93.12
Flies, by a sharper sting, announce future rain 370.1
Christ taught music 275.11
Of music, some hand down Pythagoras, others Amphion as author 18.14
Ancient musicians had only four strings, imitating nature which has 4 elements 95.16
Musicians distinguish all music by twenty degrees 414. in the preface
The 4 strings of musicians: hypate, earth; parhypate, water; nete, fire; paranete, air, up to the times of Orpheus. 96.16
Midas found the oblique flute in Phrygia.
Isaiah clearly revealed the mysteries of Christ by a single oracle 293.11

**N**
Nebuchadnezzar, by command of God, changed into an ox for seven years. 380.9.
Nataph badly translated in the edition. folio 247.21
Active nature, what it is, we have not yet explored 24.18.
Nature, producing all things with God, cannot be matter and form 25.18
The nature of man from his operations. 102.4
What is sensible nature 38.14
Nature is twofold, one sensible, the other incorruptible 38.14
i

--- Page 104 ---
INDEX

Natura, that is, matter and form. 11.9.
What is incorruptible nature. 37.14
Incorruptible nature is called divine knowledge. 33.14
Sensible nature, demonic. 38.14.
Nature emulates the supreme artisan from afar, and with steps as distant as art imitates nature itself. 12.9
Why human nature is called holy. folio 322.22
The whole power of nature, and the most sublime divine power, was placed in man. 99.1
The work of nature is limited not to the universal, but to the particular. 21.16
The work of nature is more contingent than necessary. 381.10
That which happens in many cases and frequently, says Aristotle, is natural. 21.16
That heat is generated is to be ascribed to the natural power of the sun. 49.11.
What natural works are. 381.10
By natural qualities we are neither praised nor blamed. 47.9
A natural agent, namely, the effect of God, requires a subject or matter beforehand.

N
Nebuchadnezzar, by God's command, changed into an ox for seven years. 380.9.
Nataph badly translated in the edition. folio 247.21
We have not yet ascertained what acting nature is. 24.18.
Nature, producing all things with God, cannot be matter and form. 25.18
The nature of man from his operations. 102.4
What is sensible nature. 38.14
Nature is twofold, one sensible, the other incorruptible. 38.14
i...

--- Page 105 ---
**SUBJECTS.**

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 106 ---
**INDEX**

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 107 ---
**MATTERS.**

| Column 1 | Column 2 |
| :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 108 ---
INDEX

[Column 1]
Orpheus extended his work beyond human faculty from sacred writings. 48.10
Orpheus sings of divine secrets. 193.9
Orpheus celebrates the doctrine of the Hebrews, and the one true and perfect God, in many songs. 10.8
Orpheus the poet sings only of God known to Abraham. 194.9
What Orpheus sings about God. 166.2
Orpheus flourished a little before Homer, in the time of Gideon, about three hundred years after Moses, with his sacred rites. 3.1
Orpheus learned what he sings about God from the Mosaic tablets. 10.8
Orpheus calls wisdom Pallas, born from the brain of Jove. 146.11.
Orpheus, Aglaophemus, Empedocles, Parmenides, Heraclitus, Lucretius, writers who imitated the sacred page in their manner of speaking. 181.19
What Orpheus says about the creator of the world. 163.1
By what different names the sacred bone is called. 119.2

[Column 2]
—stry require. 376.5
All oracles ceased at the coming of Christ. 212.16
That oracle, "Know thyself," whence it originated. 341.7
Oracle concerning the future judgment. Two thousand empty. Two thousand under the law. Two thousand under the Messiah. 406.6
To pray is proper to man, say Plato, Porphyry, Iamblichus, and Proclus. folio 20.16
Prayer necessary for all. 398.15
Prayer (says Damascenus) is the elevation of the mind to God. 225.6
That one cannot serve both prayer and marital affairs. 224.6
The third sphere, the first of the wandering stars. folio 59.4
What the harmony of the celestial spheres is like. folio 163.1.
What "organum" signifies in the scriptures. folio 450.7
Sweet Venus presides over the mouth. 119.27
What Origen says in "Against Celsus" about the priest venerated by Alexander the Great. 221.3
What Origen thinks about the soul separated from the body. 464.3
What Origen interprets about the she-ass. folio 171.7
What Origen says in "Peri Archon" (On First Principles). 251.4
Origen, easily the foremost of all interpreters of the sacred page, uses natural sense. 58.3
Origen had learned sacred letters from Ammonius and the wise Hebrews. folio 58.3
What Origen says mystically about numbers. 243.18
Orpheus's most elegant saying about God. folio 324.24

--- Page 109 ---
MATTERS.

[Column 1]

Parmenides asserted that nothing about inferior things could be known, except insofar as they depend on the supreme. 195.10
Parmenides established God as something fashioned like a crown, which he called *stephane* (wreath/crown). 4.2
Parmenides falsely slandered by Aristotle concerning error. 190.5
Parmenides said all things are one, how it is to be understood. 461.1
Parmenides is unjustly criticized by Aristotle. folio 166.2
Parmenides rightly [says] all creatures are one in the source from which they flow. 190.5
Parts not produced before the whole.
What Passover mystically signifies. 245.19
The sufferings of this age are not worthy of the future glory. 264.14
Great and most holy shepherds once existed. folio 156.31
Who are the true shepherds of sheep. 157.31
Heavenly Father, center of the intellectual sphere. 128.3
Why the Father loves the Son more than he is loved by the Son. 189.3
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are one in essence. 283.2
The Father fills all things with unity. 283.2
No one could understand the Father and the Son, not even Moses. 164.2
The eternal Father, the Hebrews call the higher crown. 203.5
Wonderful connection of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit. 258.10
Ancient Fathers say that two supreme measures, of which they called the higher one source, crown, origin, and the other wisdom, firstborn, are not known to mortals. 164.2
Fathers of fathers who are called patriarchs

[Column 2]

are in the supreme city. 439.3
Few are the things that have been written by the Evangelists if they are compared to those things which Christ taught. 271.9
Few receive true baptism, that is, the Holy Spirit, as in the time of the apostles. 268.4
Paul's obscure sayings are resolved. 262.14
Paul, conscious of God's secrets, explained the mystery of Christ's war and victory, where. 454.2
Paul labored more than others. 456.4
A peacock lays twelve eggs. 113.19
Fear of idleness, and sluggish work, an indication of phlegm. 102.4
Peace, according to some, is tranquil freedom of the soul. 460.1
By whom peace is given. 460.2
Perfect peace and unity, when it will reign. folio 446.5
Peace with God, how sweet and harmonious it is. folio 460.3
What true peace is. 460.3
Peace to be preserved, left to us by testamentary right. 460.1
What peace is. 459.1
*Peccatarium*, that is, an offering for sins, and thus it should be read in Paul; "He who knew no sin, he made a sin-offering." folio 234.12
The knowledge of sin comes through the law, and not justification. 232.11
The knowledge of sin comes through the law. 255.8
The sin of Christian priests and teachers is greater than that of the common people. 145.19
Sin dead without the law, and unknown. folio 255.8
Sin was and is both in angels and in humans, when etc. 256.8
i iiij

--- Page 110 ---
**INDEX**

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :------------ | :------------- |
| We also commit sin by choosing the less good. 257.9 | Refutation of the Peripatetics concerning the intellect. page 356.7 |
| How sin was introduced from the tree, and evil into the world. 329.4 | The leader of the Peripatetics, Aristotle. 190.4 |
| Sin is committed in many ways. 257.9 | Not all the doctrines of the Peripatetics and Averroists are firm and solid. page 18.14 |
| Sin against the Holy Spirit is utter despair, or defiant malice, or the crime of lèse-majesté. 185.1 | The error of the Peripatetics in the conclusion concerning the motion of the world's generation. 12.10 |
| Sin is so voluntary that in no other way is it sin. 48.10 | Daedalus invented the plumb line. 19.14 |
| What feet mean in holy songs. 451.1 | The Persians and Chaldeans have hidden sacred miracles in their books. 21.16 |
| What feet signify in the Holy Scriptures. page 427.3 | The origin of the Persian king. 315.18 |
| Through man all things are easily reconciled to God. 391.4 | Perseverance, the offering of true tithes. page 220.3 |
| I struck you with scorching wind, blight, and hail, or rather, with desiccation and drought. page 145.19 | Persaeus, a student of Zeno, says that useful and beneficial things were named by the names of the Gods. page 4.2 |
| The Peripatetics do not determine what that active nature is. 195.10 | Divine persons are said to be reproved by old wives' doctrine. |
| The Peripatetics, with their raving Aristotle, falsely accuse ideas of existing among the clouds or in the hollow of the Moon. 192.7 | |
| The Peripatetics of our age believe that nothing is firm or known unless they prove them from sensible things by syllogizing with the demonstration that Aristotle described. 11.9 | |
| The Peripatetics are content to assign sensible qualities as the cause of effects. page 49.11 | |
| The Peripatetics believe there are as many intelligences as they think there are orbs. 365.4 | |
| How the Peripatetics taught natural philosophy. 168.4 | |
| The Peripatetics treat five things concerning man: what, whence, where, whither, by what means man is. page 272.10 | |
| For the Peripatetics, soul and spirit are the same. page 385.3 | |

--- Page 111 ---
**SUBJECTS.**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

--- Page 112 ---
**INDEX**

[Left Column]

Fish, what it signifies in the scriptures. 444.3
Fish, which Christ ate after the resurrection, what it signifies. 445.3
Every planet has a domicile in one of the 12 signs. 179.18
Planet, in how many years it completes its course. 56.1
Planets correspond with the 12 signs in qualitative virtues. 179.18
Planets, how powerful they are over us. 49.11
The favor of each planet, how it is to be obtained. 81.30
Planets influence good and evil into lower things. 44.7
All planets for cherishing man. 116.23
Planets or heavens do not influence evil into the earth. folio 46.9
Of all planets, certain things with a higher consonance. 182.21
Virtues of the planets are held. 44.7
Virtues of the planets, which they are. 49.11
By the proportion of the planets' motions, the proportion of our powers is indicated. 121.30
Four of the planets for preserving the individual, three for directing work. folio 116.23
Plants, what place they hold in the archetype. folio 131.7.
Plants which are Mercurial. 80.29
Plants which are solar. 79.27
Plants, with what they flourish. 106.11
Of plants, some hot, some cold, some humid, some dry, in the first, second, third, and fourth degree. 53.15
Streets of the supernal city. 424.4
Plato warned young men not to speak rashly about divine things and the sacraments of the world. 14.12
Plato orders poets who have departed from ancient purity to be expelled from the republic. folio 48.10

[Right Column]

Plato descends from the highest to the lowest. 38.14
Plato, above all philosophers, is said by Theophrastus to have assigned causes from divine providence. 192.7
Plato, master of philosophers, so much agrees with Moses that he was called Moses. 3.1
Plato, like Saint John, beginning from the highest progenitor. 38.14
Plato in *Ion* and *Parmenides*; Hermes in *Pymander*; Sixtus the Pythagorean say that man is the temple of God, and God is the guest. 371.1
Plato does not alone generate the world, as the mad Aristotle says. 9.8
Plato always venerates divine things. 194.9
Plato says that divine wisdom is to be obtained by prayers and oracles, natural things are to be sought by reason, and moral things are to be acquired by practice. 11.8
Plato, why he judged many things to be hidden from the ignorant. 9.8
Plato and Pythagoras expounded in Greek what the Brahmans, Egyptians, and Jews had discovered. 3.1
Plato illuminated by God with a better light than Aristotle. 9.8
Plato in *Symposium*, what about our intellect. folio 175.11
Plato in *Cratylus*, what about divine names. folio 386.6.
Plato in his letter to Dionysius, what he relates. 7.6.
Plato relates wonderful things about Socrates. 374.4
Plato, when he was so vehement in contemplations, died. 374.4
Plato in the matter of the soul, whose doctrine he followed. 349.1
Plato, beginning from divine things, descends to sensible things, beyond which Aristotle (did not go).

--- Page 113 ---
**CONTENTS.**

| (like cattle to the manger) there is no progress 194.9 | The newer Platonists who approve of ideas. 192.7 |
| :------------------------------------------------------ | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 114 ---
**INDEX**

Plotinus, what he thinks about the generation of animals 108.14
Plotinus, what he thinks about heaven and the soul of the world 13.11
Plotinus taught many things transcending man, and yet he reasons falsely concerning the eternity of the world. folio 13.10
Plotinus, what he says in the book concerning the three substances 196.11
Plotinus, (his) book concerning the threefold return of the soul to God 57.2
Plotinus professes the Begetter and the Begotten, and the Holy Spirit: although he may be a pagan 196.11
Plotinus professes the eternity of the world. folio 13.11
Midacritus, first of all, brought lead from the island of Cassiterides. 19.14
Pluto has his divine riches. folio 276.12
Plutarch, how he describes God. folio 411.14
Plutarch, what he says to Cleombrotus in the book concerning the failing oracles. 212.16
Plutarch concerning ideas 192.7
The generation of rain, dew, and ice, from the will of God alone 163.1
Causes and matter of gout. 116.23
Podere, that is, what an angel clothed in Christ is. folio 58.3
Podere, i.e., clothed in a holy robe 58.3
Poets concealed theology and the secret mysteries of things in the coverings of fables 48.10
Poets are celebrated by the wise who perceive their mysteries 48.10
Poets say one thing, and mysteriously signify another 47.10
Theologian poets of the gentiles, what they say about us. folio 273.10

Poets are not to be ridiculed, nor to be censured. folio 47.10
Poets sing that God is in us. 371.2
Poets called God the Father Almighty 7.6
Poets did not sing mere fables. 47.10
Poets truly called theologians 47.10
Poets called Pan the first cause, which was called so by philosophers 6.5
Aristotle corroborates the most weighty passages of philosophy by the testimony of the poets Simonides and Homer 48.10
Phidon of Argos invented weights. 19.14
True repentance, what it is 393.8
Repentance is not the retention of punishment. 393.8
"Do penance," how it is to be understood. folio 393.8.
Repentance, as it is held in Hebrew manuscripts, signifies a return to God 360.12
The Pontiffs, successors of Peter, when they were able to say, "Silver and gold are mine," lost the right to say, "Arise and walk." 379.8
The Pontiffs and priests, successors of Peter, when they began to possess earthly things, at the same time also lost heavenly things. folio 37

--- Page 115 ---
**CONTENTS.**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

--- Page 116 ---
INDEX

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :------------ | :------------- |
| God appointed orders of principalities over provinces and kingdoms, but archangels over kings and princes, and indeed to each man God delegated one angel 41.3 | Reward is obtained according to merit. folio 264.14 |
| In princes there is a certain terror and divine power, so that the trembling people may revere them. folio 221.3 | Reward spoken of in many ways, but more clearly declared to Abraham 456.1 |
| Heraclitus of Ephesus and Hipparchus said the principle of the world was fire. folio 27.3 | Deceptions of certain people 381.10. |
| The subjective principle, who posited it. folio 28.3 | Prayers and supplications, those who most greatly proposed and established them for themselves 398.15. |
| The subjective principle lacks form and quantity by its very nature 28.3 | Agreement concerning the first production of things. folio 37.13 |
| Thales considered water to be the principle of all things 26.1. | First fruits, by what method they are offered to God 84.33 |
| Diogenes, disciple of Anaximenes, opined that the principle of things was air, endowed with divine reason 26.1 | On the first day, earth and heaven were made with common light 173.10 |
| The calamity of the Privernate land was preceded by a roar heard from the sky, and observed globes, three moons and torches seen at night. folio 371.1 | Physical principles, from where they arise. 37.13 |
| Five teachings of Proculus for rendering praises and hymns to God 398.15 | Peripatetic principles: matter, form, and privation 37.13 |
| Proculus's opinion concerning sacrifices 394.10 | Principles of things assigned by number; this number is not mathematical. folio 194.9 |
| Proculus on the harmony of the heavens | Anaxagoras, disciple of Anaximenes, established the principles of things as infinite matter woven from dissimilar particles, that is, atoms. 26.1 |
| | Anaximander, student of Thales, judged the principles of things to be infinite 26.1. |
| | Anaximenes, disciple of Anaximander, attributed the principles and causes of all things to infinite air 26.1 |
| | Socrates son of Sophroniscus and Plato son of Ariston, Athenians, posited three principles: namely God, matter, and Idea 28.3 |
| | The principles of demonstration (if demonstration is made through the quiddities and proper differences of things hidden from us) are proven unknown 22.17 |
| | Two principles of all fabricated things: matter and form 93.13 |
| | Two principles according to Manichaeus, which is erroneous 330.24. |
| | Principalities care for public affairs 439.2. |
| | k... |

--- Page 117 ---
**SUBJECTS.**

[Column 1]

Protagoras entirely denies knowing what
  he speaks about the Gods                   4.2
Whom the frost mystically unseals      145.19
frost partly harmful, partly useful. 143.18
What it means to sing psalms wisely            499.5
What the Psalter signifies according to
  Cassiodorus                       450.7
How the Psalter and cithara differ. folio                      499.7
Ptolemy, Hermes, Aratus did not mention the tenth heaven                    43.6
Ptolemy celebrates the harmony of the sphere.
  folio                            163.1.
What Ptolemy says about the foreknowledge of future things
  in the outcome                372.3
What Ptolemy thinks about celestial influence.
  folio                      341.8
How a child is nourished in the mother's
  womb. folio                       452.1
How the threefold declared battle is to be
  understood                            454.2
What beauty is, and from what it derives      68.11
The beauty of the human race in the variety
  of individuals                     351.3
The beauty of all things is more praiseworthy in the whole than
  in the part                        176.13
From what the beauty of the body results.  27.2
What the chick/foal and the Ass signify in sacred rites      297.1
The lungs, like a fan, temper the heart
  itself.                         120.29
Dust returns to the earth, the spirit to
  God, who made it.           166.3
What dust is, of which it is said: "The dust of his
  bread." folio                     239.15
As a point relates to continuous things, so an
  instant relates to successive things             13.10
Souls are cleansed from impurities in another
  Purgatory                       385.4
In another Purgatory, purified souls are cleansed
  so that they may become more divine.    385.4

[Column 2]

Double Purgatory                 385.4
Pyromancers who foreknew future things
  through fire                           372.3
The Athenians burned the book of the sophist
  Pythagoras, which begins: "Whether God exists
  seems doubtful."                 5.3.
Pythagoras's opinion about the soul separated from the
  body                     106.12
The Pythagoreans swore by the quaternarius.
  folio                            51.13
In what time Pythagoras of Samos
  flourished                             2.1
Pythagoras, the first of philosophers.     2.1
Pythagoras and his interpreter Hierocles
  profess God to be the maker of all things                             9.8
Pythagoras forbade speaking of God without light.
  folio                        2.1
Pythagoras taught by those who had read sacred
  texts                          106.12
Pythagoras professes two things about the soul: that it is
  immortal, and that it emanated from God,
  which Aristotle did not know.   273.10.
Pythagoras and Plato, in the book "On the Republic,"
  assert influences from the harmony of the heavens                           567.6
Pythagoras, a semi-theologian and semi-philosopher                          108.14
Pythagoras says that God is unity.    7.6.
Pythagoras and Plato, with their academy,
  teach that the divine power is infused into all
  things                       166.2
Pythagoras, older than Plato, how much he
  says is in agreement with the Gospel        282.20
Pythagoras, with the psalmist, calls the firstborn
  of God, Wisdom.     196.11.
Pythagoras considered God to be the mind,
  extended through all the natures of things.    4.2.
Pythagoras did not have the former in natural
  things, he did not see the latter.       40.2
                                    k ij

--- Page 118 ---
**INDEX**

[Column 1]
Pythagoras lay hidden for ten years. 37 4.4
Pythagoras says a divine kind is inherent in humans. 273.10
Pythagoras, father of philosophers. 40.2
Pythagoras established consonance under the proportion of numbers by the weight of hammers and the length of strings and pipes. 18.14
Pythagoras, what he said about the soul. 349.1
Pythagoras and the Stoics say that only those inspired by divine power can prophesy. 372.3
Different opinion of the Pythagoreans and Academics concerning ideas. 191.15
[Large decorative letter Q]
Erichthonius invented chariots. folio 19.14
The first Carthaginians (as Aristotle says), whom others call Chalcedonians, built quadriremes. 19.14
Vosperus, the first architect of quadriremes among the Carthaginians. 19.14
Those things which are not seen are eternal. 413.17
Those things which are generated acquire a new place for themselves. 11.9
Those things which are seen are temporal. 413.17
Those things which are considered least in the law are full of sacraments. 272.9
Those things which deliver from robbers, sorceries, and incantations. 82.31
Those things which are contrary are something. 393.7
Those things which are moved migrate to a new place, or are moved around something stable. 11.9
Those things which are solidified with Saturn. 116.23
"What is this that ascends?" how it is to be understood. 453.1
What kind they will be on the great day of God. 127.1
A question about Christ, which is solved by a most beautiful comparison. 325.24
In the quaternary is present the double, triple, quadru-

[Column 2]
ple, sesquialteral proportion. 50.13
The elements are distributed by the quaternary number. folio 50.13
The Pythagoreans swore by the quaternary. folio 51.13
The quaternary, the maker of all things. 51.13.
The quaternary, all musical consonance. folio 50.13
The quaternary is contained in the trinity, and the trinity in the quaternary. 423.4
The quaternary as the root and foundation of every number. 97.17
The number four holds primacy in all disciplines and arts. 51.13.
Those who fight with themselves cannot agree with others, and those who assent to this opinion. 346.11
He who did not know sin made himself a sinner. And "not sin" is to be read, as faulty codices have it. 234.12
"You who make the clouds your ascent," but better, "your throne," as the Hebrew original has it. 143.17
Those whom Mars favors are ready for all things. folio 65.9
Whatever recedes from pure act necessarily inclines towards matter. 41.3
Whatever is in God is equal. 427.3
What we have from the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. 433.2
What is signified by the virtue of jasper. folio 417.2
What was promised in the Old Testament. folio 332.8.
What we have from ideas. 195.10
Certain ones among those who are called the hinges of the Christian house, what about life. 201.1
A certain one flew a short distance in a storm, with the author's wings skillfully arranged. 379.9
Opposing eternal rest. 14.11

--- Page 119 ---
**CONTENTS.**

[Left Column]

Everyone, as a true priest, ought to offer himself. 459.3
Nesigiton of Salamis built quinqueremes. 19.14
Five institutions concerning man. 272.10
Who, how great, what kind of God: it is impossible for man to investigate. 164.2
Who is in the clouds, that is, in the saints. 187.2
By what course men are carried to heaven. page 168.5
That which has been destroyed once cannot return again, is not true. 401.1
No one looks at what is before their feet, and they search the secrets of heaven. 19.15
What is first in intention, is last in execution. 33.10
R
Rabbi Simeon, Beniochai & Elchana, what. 250.4
Rabbi Bachaie, the Hebrew author's interpretation of the Tharsis stone. 58.3
Rabbi Samuel in the commentaries on the book "On Formation". 190.4
Raphael is called physician, or medicine of God. 74.17
Rabsaces, sent by the king of the Assyrians, is defeated, 185 thousand of his soldiers having been killed. 141.15
Seminal reason is not diminished according to the subject, but according to the affections. 108.14
Reason, what. 109.15
The likeness of the reason for harmonious union. 92.11.
The rational soul conceives from the imaginative. page 6.4
What Plotinus calls the rational part in man. page 385.3
What the rational part of man is, and where. page 344.10
The Academics call it the particular rational soul. 93.13

[Right Column]

How varied are the redemptions of firstfruits. page 232.11
The sole Redeemer and expiator of the human race. 254.6
The Redeemer comes from the south. 133.8
Kings, prophets, and priests act as God's representatives on earth. 151.26
The Queen of Sheba is written with a sigma (σ), from which it is understood that she was the queen of Arabia. page 161.35
Regions which are subject to the Moon. 81.30
Which are the Venusian regions. 80.28
Regions which are ascribed to Mercury. 80.29
The celestial region has its own stones, metals, and fruits. 132.8
The difference between a true king and a tyrannical king. page 61.6
Qualities of a king and a tyrant. 61.6
What it means for the kingdom of heaven to approach. page 393.8.
How the conjunction of kingship and priesthood in sacred matters is to be understood. 459.3
What the kingdom of heaven is. 393.8
The rule of supreme truth. 395.11
The rule which never fails. 395.11
Plato established a limit for the republic or dominion: if discipline flourishes for 1728 years, it achieves its end. page 113.19
A new relation seems to be introduced from the newness of the work to God, the creator of the world. 14.12
A new relation from new things produced daily, either to God the maker, or to the governor, etc. 14.12
Theologians dispute whether the relations by which God is joined to us are real or conceptual. 97.18
What the Saturnian religion is. 61.5
Remission does not happen without the shedding of blood. page 244.9
k iij

--- Page 120 ---
INDEX

Renafci nō ex hac aqua elementari pof
sumus, fed ex illa diuina, cuius hæc
est signum 128.3
Renes Veneri tribuuntur 119.27
Renes natura fua calidi & sicci. 117.25
Remum Copæ reperiunt 19.14
Rerum creatarum numerus nouenarius.
folio 97.18
Rerum omnium principium trinū. 383.1
Res Hebræis binarios centenarios figni-
ficat.folio 383.1
Res omnes simulachrū Dei habēt. 98.18
Respublica quando fenfim in peius fata
li lege decurrit 113.19
Respublica terrestris, simulachrum cæ-
lestis. 278.15
Restitutio rerum in triginta fex milibus
annorum Plato docet 107.13
Refuba Hebraicè Latini pœnitentiam,
sed melius reuerfionem interpreta-
rentur 146.21
Resurrectio quando futura sit, & quo
tempore adimplenda cōiecturis néc-
ne deprehendi pofsit 405.6.
Resurrectio cuius uirtute conducetur.
folio 406.7
Resurrectio futura an pofsit probari ra
tionibus 403.3
Resurrectio fuerit nécne 402.2
Resurrectionem negantibus, respondet.
folio 408.11
Resurrectionem ex astris probari poffe
sunt qui arbitrētur inter astronomos.
folio 403.3
Resurrectioni quis primo dederit aditū.
folio 404.4
Resurrectionis quas authoritates habea
mus in sacris 1404.5
Resurrectionis futuræ tēpus, Eliæ ora-
culo declaratur 406.6

Retia Arachne reperit 19.14
Retributio quā Deus nobis promisit est
ad iustitiam & proportionem, nō au-
tem ad pondus 264.14
Reuben primogenitus thorum paternum
maculauit 311.14
Reuben quî interpretatur 303.6
Rex Franciæ nomine Christi decoratus
& quare 311.14
Rha barbarum quā uim habeat. 370.1
Rhea, quā Latini opem dixerunt, lapido
sa & montanæ terræ Dea. 208.13
Rhetoricam docuit Christus & uim o-
rationis 275.11
Rhinoceros qualis 187.2
Ricardus in de arca mystica quid de cō
templatione 399.16
Robur quàm multiplex 242.18.
Robur secūdū carnē qd signet. 243.18.
Rogerius Bachon multa se fecisse iactat
pura magia, tonitrua, nubes, pluuias.
folio 379.9
Roma scelerum omnium saburra, orbem
uniuersum bis uindemiauit, primo q-
dem, gladio imperiali, nunc uerò pon
tificio, & papali, ac spirituali: pro-
pter eam uindemiam Dominus illi op
probrium sempiternū parat in sæcu-
la sæculorum amen 135.10.
Romæ desolatæ futuri habitatores qua
les & quā nefarij, & tetri. 135.10.
Romæ desolatæ futurorum habitatorū
princeps Hazazel pro quo habet tra
ductio emissarium in lib. Leu. 135.10
Romæ, alteri Babyloni quid dominus cō
minetur sub nomine Bosra, id est uin
demiatricis in Isaia 135.10
Romani in arduis rebus senatus decem
uiros ad libros Sibyllinos ire iube-
bant. folio 372.3

--- Page 121 ---
MATTERS.

[Left Column]
A river stained with blood foretold many massacres to the Romans 371.1
What are dew and frost 143.18
What the dew of Hermon signifies in the scriptures 460.3
What dew is in sacred things 300.4
Rosemary is unique, and not common. folio 82.31
Rosemary frequently used not without reason in sacrifices. folio. 82.31
Rosemary, a very mystical plant. folio 153.27
Rosemary (for which scripture often has hyssop) is the most noble among plants. folio 153.27
Sprinklings were made with rosemary in the old law, and not with the herb hyssop, as it is more probable that priests used a shrub for sprinkling the people than an herb. folio 153.27
The difference between dew and frost 143.18
Ruah, the greatest mystery 383.1
Ruah, what the Hebrews call what we call spirit. folio 383.1
The ruby, excellent in virtue and most precious of all, is said by Pliny and many others S 59.3.
The Hebrew letter Shin, with its three branches, signifies the trinity. folio 97.18
Saba in Hebrew, Arabia in Latin 161.35
Saba by [pointing hand] signifies Arabia 161.35
Saba by [small circle], whence the region of the Sabaeans is so called. 161.35.
Sabat, that is, true rest 173.9
What is Sabbatai 60.5
Sabbatic period of a thousand years. 406.6
The Sabbath signifies rest 176.12
The Sabbath cannot be observed in this age. folio 176.12.

[Right Column]
Priests in our time have shown themselves so vile and base, serving wicked things and not heavenly ones, that they are now a laughingstock to God, angels, and men. folio 221.3
What kind of priests they ought to be 59.4
Priests of our age, dregs of ignorance, and sewers of baseness 219.1
Priests ought to be called to honor, and not assume honor for themselves. 223.5
Seven necessary things for a priest 213.1
What was due to a priest in the old law. folio 220.3
A certain mark of virtue ought to be present in a priest 221.3
What are the garments of a priest 221.3
For what purpose are the mystical garments of a priest. folio 222.4
Why the uncovering of the head is enjoined for Christian priests, contrary to what Christ wished to observe 226.6
The royal priesthood of Christ 231.10
A priest is constituted a teacher of the people, not indeed of vain doctrine, but of the law. folio 218.1
With what arms a priest ought to fight. folio 218.1.
A priest, an angel of the Lord 424.4.
A priest holds the place of God on earth. 221.3
What names a Christian priest ought to have 224.6
What a priest and his office are. 218.1
A good and just priest is like a visible God 218.1
A priest, as if giving sacred things 218.1.
How pure, how clean, how divine a priest ought to be 218.1
A priest ought to have clarity and illumination of doctrine and spirit. folio 224.6
k iiij

--- Page 122 ---
**INDEX**

[Column 1]

A priest ought to be endowed with manifold learning 59.4
What the Hebrews call the Shekinah 128.3
What Shekinah signifies among us in Hebrew. folio 125.34
Sacred words, the more they are understood, the more they are to be admired 143.18
Sacred things received religiously and reverently purify, but treated irreligiously they defile 253.6
Sacred Scripture, the mother and source of all theologians 389.3
Where Sacred Scripture has hyssop, rosemary is to be read 32.31
The understanding and knowledge of Sacred Scripture is called the bread of the strong 144.18
All admit the four senses of the Sacred pages 58.3
Why Sacraments were ordained 394.9
Whether Sacraments are only signs or also instruments is more seriously disputed by theologians 266.2
Among commentators, no one perceived the more secret mysteries of Scripture except Dionysius and Origen 31.7
It was the endeavor of the ancients to conceal the mysteries of God and nature 32.8
The whole power of the Sacraments is from the Father begetting us 266.2.
What a Sacrament is 394.9.
To sacrifice, Aristotle says, is innate to nature. folio 20.16.
To sacrifice to God, says Aristotle, is innate by nature 369.9
For what purpose sacrifices were offered 237.14
Sacrifices as means between God and men folio 369 9
Sacrifices, certain remedies for souls. folio 394.10.
Of the sacrifices and offerings of the Old

[Column 2]

Testament, the nature of which is so sublime that hardly anyone, understanding the mystery, can truly speak of them 243.19
The first sacrifice of the children of Israel, a lamb slain 235.13
The sacrifice of Melchizedek and Christ in bread and wine 230.10
The sacrifice of sinners, of the guilty, of peacemakers, cherboua, i.e., offering 233.12
Shaddai, a name of God 288.6
Sahasuah, we have interpreted as delights in Proverbs; it was previously interpreted more freely as playing before him at all times 163.1
Solomon, filled with wisdom by the dream of one night 355.6.
Solomon was a type of Christ rising again. folio 235.13
What Solomon says about the harmony of the world 163.1
What Solomon asserts about himself 463.2
He who desires to be saved ought to entreat those who save. folio 398.15
Salvation not from the works of the law, nor from other good things, but through God's mercy. folio 263.14
The salvation of man consists in only two commandments 259.12
Not all receive salvation, even those for whom salvation is prepared, until their time has come 214.17
Saints will differ in glory 407.9
What great things holy men have done. folio 378.7
Holiness and magnificence in his sanctification; in another translation we have something else 457.2
Who he is that drinks blood in sacred writings 410.13
Sacred writings assert blood to be the seat of the soul 105.9
What stops blood 82.31

--- Page 123 ---
**CONTENTS.**

[Column 1]

Some have opined blood to be the seat of the soul itself. 104.9.
Some have opined that life is in blood. 104.9
The blood of animals seemed to expiate sin. 369.9
What is the health of the soul? 346.12
The wise man, the scribe, the inquisitors of this age did not understand the mystery of the cross. folio 276.11
Sages who predicted future events. 372.3
True sages and philosophers, who. 381.10.
True wisdom hidden in Christ. folio 459.3
Wisdom is given by God. 168.5
Wisdom is not acquired by one's own powers. folio 168.5
Wisdom in a good citizen, better in a praetor, best in a prince. 16.13
Definition of wisdom. 63.7
Seal of divine wisdom: [symbol resembling Hebrew letter Beth] 'bet' or 'hait'. folio 40.2
It is not enough for a wise man to speak, but it is also fitting to give a reason. 22.17
The common consensus of the wise has much authority, with Aristotle, Proculus, and Porphyry as witnesses. 192.7.
Sardonyx: triple color. 419.3.
What was the cause of Satan's sin. folio 256.9
Satans, that is, adversaries. 136.10
"The trees of Adonai will be satisfied": and "not the trees of the field" is to be read. 106.11 & 131.7
Saturnalia: why for Saturn, and on how many days they were held. 60.5
In the reign of Saturn, no crime was committed, nor any other slight evil. 47.10
A great symbol of Saturn and the Sabbath and rest. 60.5
Another adaptation of Saturn with the order of 7 angels.

[Column 2]

...order of 7 angels. folio 61.5
What opinion antiquity held of Saturn. folio 60.5
In Saturn's age, long lives for all. 47.10
Saturn's thousandfold proportion to the star-bearer. folio 121.30
Saturnian religion, what it is. 61.5
Saturn's guidance in deliberating matters and in many other things, most salutary. 47.10
Saturn's evil emanation. 45.8
What Saturnians delight in. 114.20
Saturnian men: solitary, taciturn. 60.5
Saturnian men: of solid counsel, tenacious, eagerly accumulate. 60.5
Saturnians: apt for deep knowledge of things and for exploring the secrets of nature. 60.5
Saturnians: best judges and for what they are apt. folio 60.5
Saturnine people, in whom black bile prevails. folio 114.20
What arts and exercises of Saturnians. 117.23
Diseases and signs in the face of Saturnians. folio 117.23
Indeed, all planets are joined to Saturn, but he himself to none. 61.5
Ancient philosophers proclaimed Saturn to be the best. 47.10
Saturn has a correspondence with black bile. 114.20
Saturn completes its motion in 30 years. folio 12.30. & 56.1
Saturn predominates over nervous, cold, dry parts. 117.24
Saturn rules the ears. 116.23.
Saturn, over whom he presides. 77.24.
Saturn makes Saturnians god-like. 60.5
Saturn grants firm prudence. 44.7.
Saturn rules the receptive power. 116.23
Saturn, by his dryness and coldness, is contrary to human propagation. 48.10

--- Page 124 ---
**INDEX**

Saturn's sub sidere nati quid facere de-
beant. 48.10
Saul qua sorte electus est in regem. 375.5
Sauromatæ qui sint 315.18
Scala Iacob quæ sit 301.5
Scarabæi renascuntur ex equino cada-
vere. folio 401.1.
Scarabæus quomodo, & quando gene-
ret. folio 80.27
Scarabæus, qui & Cantharus dicitur,
utriusque est generis 80.27.
Scarabæus spermate suo in stercus effuso-
pilam conficit 80.27.
Scirrhi causæ 116.23
Scelera horrida omnem fidem, omnem Deum,
omne iudicium denique à mentibus (in-
quit Hierocles) auferunt. 42.2.
Scientia nostra differt ab entis scientia.
folio 24.18.
Scientia nostra causatur ab ente. 24.18
Scientia Dei est entis 24.18
Scientia Dei est causa entis 24.18
Scientia mentis quæ 358.9
Scire est per demonstrationem intellige-
re. folio 22.17
Scire est cognitio certa de quacumque re.
folio 22.17
Sciri nihil dicitur, nisi quod demonstra-
tione probatur 22.17
Scorpion scorpioni medicina 309.12
Scorpionem tormenti genus inuenit Cre-
tensis 19.14
Scorpionis cor in gradu Sagittarij tertio
folio 82.31
Scorpius triplex terreus, cælestis & su-
percælestis 112.18
Scorpius inguini insidiatur 111.17
Scorp. etiam medio die habent uenenum. 112.18
Scotus plus Aristoteli concedit eius fortaf-
sis uerba interpretando, quàm ipse con-

What those born under the star of Saturn ought to do. 48.10
By what lot Saul was chosen as king. 375.5
Who the Sarmatians are. 315.18
What Jacob's Ladder is. 301.5
Scarabs are reborn from a horse's carcass. folio 401.1.
How and when a scarab reproduces. folio 80.27
The scarab, which is also called a Cantharus, is of both sexes. 80.27.
The scarab, having poured its seed into dung, makes a ball. 80.27.
Causes of scirrhus. 116.23
Horrible crimes take away all faith, all God, and finally all judgment from minds (says Hierocles). 42.2.
Our knowledge differs from the knowledge of being. folio 24.18.
Our knowledge is caused by being. 24.18
The knowledge of God is of being. 24.18
The knowledge of God is the cause of being. 24.18
What the knowledge of the mind is. 358.9
To know is to understand through demonstration. folio 22.17
To know is certain knowledge about anything. folio 22.17
Nothing is said to be known unless it is proven by demonstration. 22.17
A scorpion is medicine for a scorpion. 309.12
A Cretan invented the scorpion, a kind of torture. 19.14
The heart of the Scorpion in the third degree of Sagittarius. folio 82.31
Triple Scorpio: earthly, celestial, and supercelestial. 112.18
Scorpio attacks the groin. 111.17
Scorpions have venom even at midday. 112.18
Scotus grants more to Aristotle, perhaps by interpreting his words, than he himself con-

ceived. 13.11
The whole Scripture is so much referred to Christ that there is no iota or apex which is not fulfilled in Him. 249.3
Scripture never speaks inappropriately except by the fault of the translator. 465.3
Some make Scripture bipartite. folio 259.11
Sebet is interpreted as "scepter". 297.1.
Cicero strives to prove that ages existed even without a number of days and nights before the created world, by denying that they had a beginning. 14.12
What "seculum" signifies. 405.6
What the future age is. 464.3.
Penthesilea the Amazon invented the axe. folio 19.14
What it means to sit upon a choenix. 282.20
What Sebarim is interpreted as. 457.2
What Schir signifies. 134.9
Sehir is a mountain and the peak of worldly prosperity. 135.9
Shem, son of Noah, his family with the angel Jophiel. folio 363.1
Many say that seed flows from all parts of the whole body. 265.1
Semes, called "sun" in Hebrew. 74.17
Semes signifies "proper". 74.17
The greater vital part of the seed is from the heart, brain, and liver. 265.1
Which part of the seed Hippocrates thought flowed from the brain, but Aristotle from the heart. 265.1
The beautiful distribution of the senary triangle: the base of three into the trinity, the matter of the two in the middle, which is reduced to one by form. 35.11
That God completed His works in the number of six days is a great mystery, not a signification of some time. 35.11

--- Page 125 ---
**SUBJECTS.**

[Left Column]
A more elegant number than six could not be found, which consists of the double proportion it contains within itself. 35.11
The number six, the first perfect number. folio 35.11
The number six, called Gamo by the Pythagoreans. 35.11
The number six from the double proportion which makes a diapason. 35.11
The pure truth of sensible things is not to be expected, according to Augustine. 12.10
By the speculation of senators, or from reasons founded in the same, we do not attain knowledge of divine things, according to Proculus. folio 12.10
Whether sensible things have a univocal or an equivocal relationship with God. 15.13.
The knowledge of God cannot be imagined or known by sensible things and by motion. 15.13
Those who rely on the senses fall into many errors and into contempt of religion. 14.12
The sense of touch pertains to the animal parts. folio 345.10
If the sense perceives nothing, it contemplates with the mind. 345.10
Sen (Incomplete entry)

[Right Column]
...than he himself conceived. 13.11
The whole Scripture is so much referred to Christ, that there is no iota or tittle which is not fulfilled in Him. 249.3
Scripture never speaks inappropriately except by the fault of the translator. 465.3
Some divide Scripture into two parts. folio 259.11
Sebet means scepter. 297.1.
Cicero endeavors to prove that ages existed even without the number of days and nights before the created world, by denying they had a beginning. 14.12
What "saeculum" signifies. 405.6
What the future age is. 464.3.
Penthesilea the Amazon invented the axe. folio 19.14
What it means to sit upon a choenix. 282.20
What Sebarim means. 457.2
What "Schir" signifies. 134.9
Sehir is a mountain and the peak of worldly prosperity. 135.9
Shem, son of Noah, his family with the angel Jophiel. folio 363.1
Many say that seed flows from all parts of the whole body. 265.1
Semes, called sun in Hebrew. 74.17
Semes signifies "proper". 74.17
The greater vital part of the seed is from the heart, brain, and liver. 265.1
Which part of the seed Hippocrates thought flowed from the brain, but Aristotle from the heart. 265.1
The beautiful distribution of the senary triangle: the base of three into the trinity, of two the middle matter, which is reduced to one by form. 35.11
That God completed His works in the number of six days is a great mystery, not a signification of some time. 35.11...

--- Page 126 ---
**INDEX**

[Left Column]

Both sexes, both in trees and plants,
as well as in animals. 132.7
The Erythraean Sibyl foretold future events to the Trojans. page 374.4
The Phoenicians invented observations of the stars in navigation. 19.14
The power of the stars is greater than that of herbs, etc.,
and simple things. 82.31
Three signs of the Zodiac attributed to each of the elements. 54.16
Signs seen not only by the position of the stars, but by a true and
living figure in the sky. 56.1
Each of the signs of the Zodiac rules any part
of the lower world. 57.2
Signs preceding the day of judgment. 405.6.
12 signs divided into four groups of three.
page 115.21
Christ preferred the sign of Jonah the prophet
to other signs. 292.9
Silence for those who have been transformed. 466.1
What divine silence is. 466.1
Shiloh will come, that is, the Messiah. 250. 4.
Shiloh is to be understood as the true Messiah.
page 296.1
Simeon redeemed his crime with no good deed,
therefore he was blessed neither by his father Jacob,
nor by Moses. 312.15.
How Simeon is interpreted. 303.6.
Simeon and Levi abused the Shechemites and Joseph
with strong force. 312.15.
What Simeon Beniochai relates about unclean
spirits. 439.2
From where the Simeonites sustained themselves. 315.18
What an ape portends to the Spartans. 370.1
A more than ingenious similitude of Ezekiel's
vision with the four composite elements. 59.3.
Similitude among rational creatures.
page 428.1
Whence the similitude of the begetter and the begotten.

[Right Column]

page 267.3
Whence and in what ways the similitude of children with parents. 268.5.
How the similitude of an instantaneous body with a point
of a line is to be understood, and in what they
agree and differ. 13.10
What Simonides did when Hiero asked
what God was. 5.3
What an ape held in delight by the king of the Molossians
did. 370.1
Simplicius, a student of Aristotle, disdains
such a teacher. 22.17
Mount Sinai in Arabia. 319.20
How Mount Sinai of Arabia is connected
to Jerusalem. 160.35
Mount Sinai beloved by God. 237.14
Sinai imbued with the same influx as Jerusalem.
page 160.35
Zion in the psalm signifies a mirror. 460.3
How much Zion was loved by God. 135.9.
Zion is situated in the middle of the world. 135.9.
If someone cannot work, let him only believe,
and good will shall suffice. 263.14.
Sirens who preside over the heavens. 367.7
The power of emeralds. 80.28
If Socrates had not inflicted death upon himself by
voluntarily taking poison against the edict of the one God,
whom he asserted, he could have been saved. page 7.6
Socrates and Plato, taught by holy men and prophets,
said that ideas separated from matter exist in the innermost parts
of God. page 192.7
Socrates in Phaedo concerning Anaxagoras.
page 204.6
Socrates was in such an ecstasy of mind that he persevered
for 24 hours without food, without movement, without sensation,
always intent in one place. 374.4
Socrates suffered death for the opinion of asserting one God. 7.6

--- Page 127 ---
**SUBJECTS.**

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 128 ---
```
INDEX

| | |
| :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 129 ---
**SUBJECTS.**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

--- Page 130 ---
**INDEX**

Why the state is not in heaven. 17.14
Each star contains as many stadia as the earth. 178.16
The royal Jovian star in the 21st degree of Leo. page 82.31
Do stars act upon us? 48.11
Why stars do not suffer eclipse. 34.10.
With what wine Stephen was intoxicated. 444.2.
What the Stoics thought concerning ideas. 192.7
Saturn and the Moon preside over the stomach. page 116.23
Stomach and uterus are of the same nature and temperament. 116.23
The stomach is hotter than the liver. 116.23
Hot stomach. 116.23
The stomach is cold and dry by its own nature. page 116.23
Strato asserts that all divine power is situated in nature. 4.2
Nothing can be more miserable than folly. 14.12
What is substance? 92.11
When the successors of Peter, lying, said, "Silver and gold I have none," they lost the power of treading upon serpents, etc. 379.8
What suffumigation, censer signify. page 246.21
How Shulamite is interpreted. page 452.1
Whence the Sulmonian sang of origin and structure. 3.1
The total number of men with the disciples in the reception of the Holy Spirit. 358.9
Above the face of the firmament, and not beneath the fir-

--- Page 131 ---
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

--- Page 132 ---
INDEX

Christ's Testament made on the cross.
11. folio 278.15
With what solemnity Christ's Testament was celebrated.
279.16
How Christ's Testament was confirmed.
11. 279.17
A testament, by the consent of all, is ratified and firm by the death of the testator.
279.17
Artemon of Clazomenae invented war tortoises.
119.14.
The Hebrew text has delights in the harmony of the universe, and not playing on the earth, from which follows "and my delights are with the sons of men."
163.1
The text in Genesis for paradise has "gan habaden," that is, "garden of delights."
folio 147.21
The text in Genesis, where it says "contra orientem" (towards the east), "mikedam" in Hebrew does not mean east, but signifies beginning.
147.21
Who are the witnesses of the testament made by Christ?
folio 279.16
How we ought to enter the mother's chamber.
452.1
Thales of Miletus considered water to be the principle of things.
128.4
Thales (believed) all things into it (water)

--- Page 133 ---
**CONTENTS.**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                

--- Page 134 ---
**INDEX**

**[Left Column]**

The Trumpet of God and the angelic voice, what it is. 406.8
Tubal-cain, father of those playing the lyre.
folio 18.14
Piseus the Tyrrhenian invented the trumpet. 19.14
Thummim, what it is. 59.4
Then the name of the Lord began to be invoked, for which it is erroneously read, "then he began to invoke the name." 428.2
The multitude of the blessed cannot be numbered.
folio 430.1
Disturbance concerning many things and gathering concerning one thing, how it ought to be understood.
folio 461.1
The five divisions near the tabernacle, what they signify. 322.22
The Cyclopes first built towers, as Aristotle says; the Phoenicians, as Theophrastus says. 18.14
A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons, why they were offered for the purification of childbirth. 240.15
The tiger, more ferocious than other wild beasts, moves its cubs when a man is seen. 378.8
The drum, how it is, and what it signifies. 499.7
A typical description of the adornment of the city according to Ezekiel. 430.1
Qualities of a tyrant and a king. 61.6
The difference between a tyrant and a true prince.
folio 61.6

**V**
Denoting the hexad, it indicates life, by which all things live.
folio 98.18
Tohu va-bohu, how it is to be understood in the formation of the heavens. 39.1
The red heifer mystically indicates the Blessed Virgin. 225.6
The most celebrated mystery of the red heifer.
folio 252.6

**[Right Column]**

Vav, the letter of divinity. 383.1
Vav signifies six to the Hebrews. 383.1
Prophets were of different kinds. 372.3
A prophet is made in three ways. 373.4
A true prophet, who he is and how he is made.
folio 373.4
Prophecy made with a clear voice, why the voice is doubled. 375.4
Prophecy is not to be denied for that reason, because the interpreter is ignorant. 376.5
Prophecy is defended. 375.5
Prophecy also occurs with a clear voice, which is certainly the most celebrated of all. 375.4
Prophecy made with a clear voice, by which holy men. 375.4
Bellerophon invented riding a horse. 19.14
Icarus first constructed sails. 19.14
The vena cava has its origin from the convex part of the liver. folio 117.25
Veins have their origin from the concave part of the liver.
folio 117.25
Piseus invented hunting spears. 19.14
From where the extreme poison comes, from there comes the most immediate remedy. 112.18
Those to be revered, to whom God entrusted utterances and secrets which we cannot investigate. 194.9
Sorcerers can do all things, by the testimony of poets. 380.9
What enchantments of sorcerers. 381.10.
What things they enjoy from Venus. 80.28
All things are bound together by Venus. 119.27
Both Venuses, by whom they were begotten. 73.16.
The Academics distinguish two Venuses. 73.16
What things are attributed to honorable Venus. 74.16
The harmony of Venus with the powers. 68.1
Qualities of ethereal Venus. 73.16
Qualities of aerial Venus. 73.16
Aeolus, son of Helen, first discovered the system of the winds. 19.14

--- Page 135 ---
**CONTENTS.**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

--- Page 136 ---
**INDEX**

[Column 1]

What the wine made from water by Christ at the wedding signifies 443.2
Twofold spiritual feast of wine. 444.2.
Wine converted into the true blood of Christ 444.2
Whence the wine of loves and worldly wine is offered to us 443.2
The wine which Christ offered to us at the supper 443.2
Why the wife of the first-formed man is so called "Virago". folio 442.2
What the rod of Moses mystically signifies. 337.14
The rod of Moses and the cross 237.14
How prodigious the rod of Moses is 237.14
What Virgil calls the spirit of the world. folio 166.2.
The God-bearing Virgin sang in harmony with God in heart and soul 499.5
The Virgin cherishes the loins 111.17
The Virgin Mary was more than a martyr. folio 458.2
Virgo, because then the Sun is sterile, seems to be infertile 112.18
Virgo, a sterile sign 310.13
If men are submerged, they float supine; women, on the contrary. folio 119.27
For men, Venereal power is in the loins. 119.27
Virtue is an operation assimilating man to God. folio 395.12.
No virtue, as Aristotle says, unless through God 371.2
Strongest divine virtue. 428.2.
Finite and determined virtue requires time in acting 33.10
Infinite virtue does not require time in acting. folio 33.10
Virtue is a habit of the soul 395.12
Virtue is a constant affection of the soul 395.12
Virtue is a strong and unconquered patience in enduring things 395.12

[Column 2]

Whence our seminal virtue 265.1
How evangelical virtue is padded with ass's bristles 419.3
Which are the disparate virtues 346.12
The seven virtues through the seven planets. folio 121.30.
While virtues shine in lower things, they gleam in higher things 16.13
Whence virtues are named 395.12.
Virtues which strengthen the spirit. folio 396.12
Virtues complete the works moving the heavens. folio 439.2
Which are the civil virtues 348.13.
Which are the purgative and heroic virtues. folio 348.13
The way of virtues is arduous and difficult. 396.12.
A threefold kind of virtues 348.13
Purgatorial virtues 374.4
The definition of exemplary virtues particularly assigned 348.13.
Exemplary virtues are twofold. folio 348.13.
The consonance of virtues with the soul. 347.13.
The power of nature is stronger than that of art. 428.2
What the vision of beatitude is 362.12
The vision of God, our beatitude 428.2
The vision of God is called meridional, morning, and evening 463.2
What the evening vision is according to Augustine. folio 462.1
What eternal life is 674.10
Life consists in blood 280.17
The unique life of the world 94.15
The fiery life of animals 52.14
The one life of all living things 201.1.
Manifold life 205.8
The manifold and unique life of all. 201.1
The work of the life of the stone: augmentation, attraction, expulsion 104.8

--- Page 137 ---
**SUBJECTS.**

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

--- Page 138 ---
**INDEX**

Urim properly means illustrations, although
our translation has it otherwise. 59.4.
The tail of Ursa Major in the 19th degree of Virgo.
folio 82.31
How each wicked person knows himself to be the cause.
folio 46.8
Falling Vulture, in the 7th degree of Capricorn.
folio 82.31

**X**
Xenocrates, disciple of Plato, was abstracted
from his body for one whole hour every single day. 374.4
Xenocrates established eight gods for himself. 4.2
Xenophanes, having joined his mind, wished that everything that
existed was God. 4.2
Xenophon reports Socrates disputing
that one ought not to seek the form of God.
folio 4.2

**Z**
What place Zebulon held in the eastern region:
but in the western, Mount Carmel. 313.16
What Zebulon (means). 303.6
What happened to Zechariah, father of John the Baptist,
before he had a son. 170.6
Zadok, who interprets. 426.2
How Zilpah is interpreted. 303.5
Zeno with the old academy, what about divinations. 372.3.
Zeno posited two principles of things, God
and matter, of which he called the former the cause of acting,
the latter the cause of suffering. 127.2
Zeno, the ancient philosopher, (posited) God as the
prince and disposer of nature, and the Logos
which is intelligence, etc., and idea. 192.7
Zeno considers natural law to be God. folio 4.2
Zipurim signifies birds generally, and not
sparrows specifically to be offered for lepers. 241.17
From where each sign of the Zodiac has its
denomination. 111.18
What zoophytes are called by the Platonists.
folio 77.21.
Zoophytes sing with Saturn. 76.20
Zoroaster, son of Ham, grandson (as Didymus
says) or son of Noah (according to Berosus).
folio 10.8
Zoroaster lay hidden for twenty years. 374.4
Zoroaster spent 20 years in solitude.
folio 103.5
Zoroaster says that all things were made from fire.
folio 410.14
Zoroaster, inventor of the magical art. 380.9
Zopyrus truly judged Socrates to be devoted to Venus
from his physiognomy. 120.4
Zuph signifies a marshy reed-bed.
folio 142.16
Zur perhaps signifies the name of God. 133.9

**THE END.**

--- Page 139 ---
PROEM TO THE FIRST CANTO.

[Decorative element] First Canto, in which
ALL DIVINE, HUMAN, CELESTIAL,
SUPRA-CELESTIAL, AND INFERIOR
things are shown to be distributed in fitting
proportion and harmonious sweetness.

PROEM TO THE FIRST CANTO.

[Large decorative initial C] O Most Blessed Father, when we are about to discourse on the sonority of the world, it is fitting that we take the path through those harmonious steps, through which that supreme Arch-Musician entered upon his work: Who arranged each individual thing, and the whole world itself, with sonorous numbers: Nor did the hand of the artist himself grow weary, until he had brought the work to a perfect consonance through due numbers into itself, so that a full octave symphony might be completed: which is then finally completed, when, with six intermediate steps passed, the last (which is the same, and not the same, as the first) recalls itself to itself. Indeed, by this octave the whole fabric of the world is perfected: by this it is arranged: by this, finally, it is completed. For it is perfected when the supreme Creator arranged this whole fabric through six steps of things full of sacraments, revealed by Moses under the veil of six days, and rested on the seventh. Which, if it is counted with the first, while existing in itself, is the eighth: And the perfect work, arranged by this harmonious succession of days, endures: so that it always returns after the seventh to the eighth, which is the same as the first and not the same. Thus at last will the most consonant work of God be completed, when in the perfect octave (of which we shall speak in its proper place) all things will be restored to their original state. We also, following the Creator's footsteps, will complete this harmonious work through that octave, returning to the same point from which we also take our beginning: so that both extremes may be from the supreme God. For the First Tone will be from Him, inasmuch as He is the beginning: The Last from the same, inasmuch as He is the end: And the intermediate ones concern the progression from the first to the last, in which (if I am not mistaken) are contained the elements of worldly and supra-worldly speculation.

--- Page 140 ---
PRIMI CANTICI TONI.

[Decorative woodcut initial V containing a figure] Who is the progenitor of the world, and in what harmony of super-excellent unity He rejoices. Tone I.
In what concord the principles of things, and their describers, agree or disagree. Tone II.
By what consonant number the supreme artificer descends into all created things. Tone III.
By what mutual harmonies the first kinds of things agree among themselves, and with the Archetype. Tone IIII.
By what consonance their intervals are filled. Tone V.
In what concord all things are contained in man, as in a small instrument. Tone VI.
By what sonority all things, even particulars existing in this earthly world, agree with the Archetype. Tone VII.
What is the ultimate, into which all diapason consonances are reduced. Tone VIII.

PRIMI TONI CAPITA.

What we can learn about God from holy men illuminated by divine light, which we discuss. Chapter I.
That without such light, all who spoke about God erred through very many deviations. Chapter II.
And if we cannot understand what God is, nevertheless we are taught that God exists both by oracles, and by prayer, and by the consent of all. Chapter III.
How through the trace, or image, of created things, and their consonance with the Archetype, we can arrive at the knowledge of His fecundity. Chapter IIII.
That God is full of the fecundity of all things and numbers, so that He can produce all things most consonantly. Chapter V.
That God is one. Chapter VI.
That that most fecund first mind, which is called God, produced both within and without. Chapter VII.
That God fabricated the world. Chapter VIII.
The condition of the world does not allow philosophers to conclude against its generation. Chapter IX.
Nor does motion achieve the same. Chapter X.
Its governors likewise contribute less. Chapter XI.
Nor by proceeding from the artificer do they prove what they intend. Chapter XII.
Why philosophers erred from Catholic truth. Chapter XIII.
Reasons for the world's newness. Chapter XIIII.
Why God did not make the world before or after what Moses narrates. Chapter XV.
Philosophers fail while they strive to prove that God necessarily acts externally. Chapter XVI.
Progress for contingency in the divine work. Chapter XVII.
God knows particulars. Chapter XVIII.

--- Page 141 ---
TONE ONE. 2

WHAT WE CAN LEARN ABOUT GOD FROM HOLY MEN
ILLUMINATED BY DIVINE LIGHT,
Which we discuss. Chapter I.

[Decorative initial C] AS WE DESIRE, according to what the undertaken work demands, to
investigate who the progenitor of this world is, it undoubtedly happens,
what Plato, inspired by some divine power, used to say: "The maker
and generator of the universe is as difficult to find as, once found, to
worthily declare," since inaccessible light dwells [there]. Hence, very many
speaking about Him erred through many byways, all those indeed whose eyes He
Himself had not illuminated. Therefore Pythagoras commands that no one presume
to speak about divine matters without light: [Marginal note: Pytha.] without that light, I say, about which the
Psalmist sings: "In your light we shall see light." [Marginal note: Dauid] Bathed in this light, the first man
saw God Himself walking at midday: he recognized His voice: and he duly observed
the natures of all created things, so that he might impose a fitting name on each one.

By this light, Seth (after Enos was born) began to invoke the name of the Lord,
still hidden, and Enoch to predict future events, and to be translated to God Himself.
By this light, Noah, as not only the monuments of the Hebrews, but also of the
Chaldeans and Scythians (if we believe Berosus) [Marginal note: Bero.] relate, predicted the future flood:
he built the ark: he saved the seed of men and animals. [Marginal note: Abrahā] Afterwards, he taught the
Armenians and Scythians, then the Italians, whom scripture calls Chittim, the secrets
of nature, theology, and sacred rites: and he distinguished the courses of the stars,
and years according to the sun's movement, and months according to the moon's course:
Whom poets celebrate under the name of Janus. Indeed, Noah is called Janus (who
signifies "wine-bearing") in the Aramaic language.

This light, the later it came, the more brilliantly it later infused Abraham's mind,
so that he taught better rites: gave a sign to the chosen family: was the first to
recognize the one God diffused in the Trinity: concerning the revealed name of God,
and concerning the sacraments of His solitary eminence, and how He diffuses Himself
into others through sacramental vestments or channels, he wrote before all others
(as the Cabalists assert), [Marginal note: Cabal.] or taught what others wrote.

For this, Alexander [Marginal note: Alexan.] and Eupolemon [Marginal note: Eupol.], being cited, depose thus: "Abraham, most
excellent of all in holiness and wisdom, first taught the Chaldeans, then the
Phoenicians, and finally the Egyptian priests astrology and divine matters." But
Julius Firmicus, the astronomer, [Marginal note: Iul. firm.] calls him divine on account of his wonderful
wisdom: "Who testified to the one maker of all things not without risk to his life,
and preserved and taught to posterity all things pertaining to wisdom and divine
worship: Which he left to Isaac as if by hereditary right: and Isaac to Jacob: and
Jacob himself handed down such records to his family, so that all wisdom emanated
from that family: With which Moses was imbued above all others, on A ij

--- Page 142 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

in whom the doctrine of all his fathers is not doubted to have converged. And this is the
wisdom of the Egyptians, by which (according to Luke's testimony in the Acts of the
Apostles) he had been instructed. For Abraham had taught this to the Egyptians: which
they afterwards committed to writing after their Io, daughter of Inachus, whom the
Egyptians worship as a goddess: because they believed they had received letters from her:
But falsely, because Inachus began to rule the Argives, at which time Abraham's grandsons
were already receiving this light. [Marginal note: Eupole.] But Eupolemon writes that Moses was in the times of Inachus
and Ogiges, and this wise man, who taught grammar to his Hebrews (to whom he gave
the name from עבר, which means "to pass over") and all wisdom: Who afterwards
bestowed it upon the Phoenicians [Marginal note: Plinius] because of their proximity: from whom the Greeks also
received the system of characters. Hence Pliny said that the primordial letters were Assyrian:
and that Cadmus transferred sixteen from Phoenicia to Greece: from which Assyrians the
Egyptians also learned: although they boast of their antiquity: For Moses (as we said),
initiated into their institutions, taught them better things: [Marginal note: Strabo] so that he was called an Egyptian
Priest by Strabo. There were also, in writing about Athenian affairs, famous Helanicus,
Philochorus, Castor, Thales, and Alexander Polyhistor, and Diodorus, easily the foremost
of all historians, who diligently surveyed almost all of Asia and Europe with his own eyes.
All these proclaimed the most ample signs of antiquity, and about Moses, the most excellent
leader, and author of divine things. For neither before him is anyone found who committed
anything to writing: unless perhaps Abraham (as we touched upon) and Enoch: whose
doctrine Moses, as a legitimate heir, most fully collected in his volumes, adding what he
had received from the mouth of the living God in daily oracles, or embracing everything
in them. Hence [Marginal note: August.] our Augustine speaks with great boldness. "No nation," he says, "should
boast with any unjust vanity about the antiquity of its wisdom above our patriarchs and
prophets: since not even Egypt is found (which usually boasts falsely and vainly about the
antiquity of its doctrines) to have surpassed our patriarchs' wisdom with any of its doctrines
during their time." Nor did any of the philoso- [Marginal note: Pytha.] phers precede them: since the name of
philosopher drew its origin from Pythagoras the Samian: who began to flourish at the time
when the captivity of the Jews was ended. Nor should the Sages be brought forward, who
long preceded the philosophers: who themselves were after Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
Joseph, indeed even after Moses himself: as [Marginal note: Augusti. Cicero] Augustine most accurately calculates. Thales,
who (according to Cicero's testimony) first disputed about the nature of things, flourished
at the time when Hezekiah ruled the Jews, and Numa Pompilius ruled the Romans. And
after him followed Solon the Athenian, Chilo the Lacedaemonian, Pittacus the Mytilenaean,
and the other Sages, even the most ancient of the Greeks, are younger than the Hebrew
prophets: For Moses wrote three hundred and ten years [Marginal note: Au. Eus. Cicero] before the destruction of Troy:
as Augustine and Eusebius calculate. But Homer and Hesiod (as Cicero says) followed
Troy by one hundred and fifty years: by which a little

--- Page 143 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 3

the earlier Orpheus with his sacred rites, namely in the time of Gideon, but about three hundred years after Moses, flourished. Moses therefore was the first who committed to public writings those sacred mysteries which, illuminated by divine light and communion, he had learned: mysteries by which his progenitors had also been instructed, at least in part. But, wrapping these things in histories for the unlearned common people with whom he dealt, he presented himself as one of them; entrusting more secret sayings to the wiser ones; and leaving for wise posterity, in a hidden place, under a veil, the most splendid light of divine and natural things to be gazed upon, like that dove which the Prophet commemorates as most simple in appearance, but with its hinder parts shining with the gleam of gold. By this splendor, the eyes of the Wise, undefiled by sensible things or any other impurities, gazed into the deepest mysteries of God and nature. Among these, the great Trismegistus was the first: who followed Moses's teaching to such an extent that Moses was called by those ancient wise men. For Artabanus [Marginal note: Artaba.] showed that whatever is said of Trismegistus, the same was found in Moses: Plato also, the master of philosophers (so that I may agree with Cicero, Augustine, Apuleius, Proclus, and many wise men [Marginal note: Plato / Cicero] [Marginal note: August. / Apule.], let others say what they will), agrees so much with Moses that Numenius Pythagoras [Marginal note: Procul. / Nume.] says Plato is nothing other than Moses speaking in Attic Greek. Pythagoras, from whom the Academics learned [Marginal note: Plato] (as Hermippus the Pythagorean testifies [Marginal note: Hermi.]), transferred much from Moses's doctrine into his own philosophy; so that it is true what Iamblichus [Marginal note: Iambli.], the great priest of the Egyptians, says in the volume he compiled about their mysteries: 'Pythagoras, Democritus, Plato, Eudoxus, and many others approached the Egyptian priests, where from the pillars of Mercury, which were inscribed with all kinds of doctrine, they learned a more secret philosophy.' But Mercury (as we have said) drew from Moses. This, then, is the teacher from whom all Syrian, Egyptian, and Greek wisdom emanated. Ambrose, Eusebius Pamphilus, and Cyril also testify to this among our own writers, beyond Augustine [Marginal note: Augu.]; the last of whom says word for word: 'Pythagoras and Plato, when they devoted themselves to studies in the land of Egypt [Marginal note: Ambr. / Eus. Pã.], did not ignore the doctrine of many illustrious men, and especially that of Moses [Marginal note: Cyrillus], according to their diligence. For at that time, the name of Moses was held in no small admiration among the Egyptians; hence we do not doubt that they received the understanding of God, that is, of the First Cause, from him: whom Numenius Pythagoras followed, writing many things from Mosaic doctrine in his books, as the great Basil testifies [Marginal note: Basilius / Clemens].' And so that I may free myself from these, Clement of Alexandria, Atticus the Platonist [Marginal note: Atticus], Eusebius, and Aristobulus [Marginal note: Eu. Ari.] prove that the Gentiles (if they had any excellent doctrines and mysteries) usurped them from the Jews and wrapped them in coverings of fables: such as that of Deucalion from the history of the deluge, and the fiction of Phaethon from the retrogradation of the sun, which occurred in the time of Hezekiah. Whence also, that they fabricated stories about giants who piled mountain upon mountain and tried to reach heaven, it is doubtless that they drew this from the Tower of Babel. From here, the Sulmonian (Ovid) [Marginal note: Ouid.], from where he sang of the origin and fabric of the world, usurped. Homer also, Hesiod, and Linus, from where they sang of the seventh day to be sanctified, undoubtedly received this from here: For Homer indeed says.
A iij

--- Page 144 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Home. The seventh light was present, and all things were complete and perfect. Whom others, following, agree on the same point: and before them Orpheus, from whom he would extol the author of the universe with the highest praises, took it in his work "On the Divine Word": for (as Artabanus testifies) Orpheus learned many things from the doctrine of Moses. After whom Virgil learned to restrain the winds under Aeolus from Noah's ark: in which all kinds of animals were ruled by Noah's command. From the happy state of Adam also they sang, and very many wrote in prose about the golden Saturnian reigns. It would be long to recount how many kinds of secrets of inferior and supramundane nature poets learned to wrap in the veils of fables and enigmas from those, who, taught by sacred oracles, concealed the mysteries entrusted to them: lest they expose holy things to be trampled by pigs. But because some do not think that Peripatetic philosophy can stand with Hebrew philosophy: indeed, from this they take occasion for ridicule, let them say where they found, or rather fabricated, it to have been said by their Aristotle about Moses: "This man said many good things: but he proved nothing?"

Clear. Therefore, let Clearchus the Peripatetic, cited on his behalf in the book "On Sleep," say how much the prince of the Peripatetics (Aristotle) deferred to the Hebrews. For he says that when Aristotle was debating with Hyperochides, he said: "There was a Jew who, descending from the higher regions of Asia to the maritime cities, was Greek both in language and in spirit: And when it happened that at that time we too were staying in the maritime regions of Asia, he came to us voluntarily out of love for philosophy: who brought us much more than he received: these things Clearchus says." To which places the same Aristotle sailed, persuaded by a short letter of Plato, written from Egypt in commendation of the Israelite wise men: as we found in Hebrew records. Megasthenes, moreover, in the third book of "Jewish Affairs," declares not only Aristotle but all philosophers to be disciples of Hebrew wisdom. "All things," he says, "which the ancient Greeks wrote about nature, others also handed down before them: For the Brahmans among the Indians (who are also called Jews) philosophized much earlier." Nor should anyone wonder that Jews were Indians: since Aristotle also says in Clearchus: "The Jews are the Calani from India." But they were called Jews from the father of a principal tribe: and Israelites from their divine Prince and progenitor Jacob: and Hebrews from their passage, to which they were always devoted as strangers. To this Numenius assents in the first volume "On the Good." "Plato," he says, "and Pythagoras expounded in Greek what the Brahmans, Egyptians, and Jews had discovered." There are also those who assert that the mysteries of Numenius, Philo, Plotinus, Iamblichus, and Proclus were received from Paul, Dionysius, Hierotheus, and John. Indeed, it would be tedious to cite all who assert that the Jews and our fathers (from whom we too received the first principles of wisdom) were the first teachers of wisdom, from whose founts all mortals have drawn: For this not only our own people believe: but also most distinguished historians and eminent philosophers testify: To these let us also add the oracles of the Gentiles: if they do not believe the witnesses brought forward: For Porphyry relates that the oracle of Apollo handed down these things concerning the Jews.

--- Page 145 ---
VOLUME ONE.                                                                                                4

That way is exceedingly difficult, and closed with bronze gates,                                     Ap.ora.
the very way which opens life to us and bestows blessedness.
Nor indeed can it easily be narrated or explained by any words,
to where the path leads, which first of all those who drink the fair
waters of the Nile began to hand down, then the Phoenicians,
and that concern was next to the Assyrians; but the far-renowned
Hebrew nation knew it and acknowledged it.
And again in another oracle.
To the Chaldeans, what true wisdom is, it was granted only
to the Hebrews themselves to know: those who with a pure
mind worship the eternal king and God.

Therefore, from an academy of this kind, which is taught by divine light, and not from elsewhere,
can we learn about God and the progenitor of all things: If, however, we have received
anything from philosophers or other outsiders, we will do so under that rule which Augustine teaches;      Augu.
That we receive it as from unjust possessors, just as the Hebrews of old claimed from the Egyptians
vessels and idols, which they converted to a better use.

        That all who spoke about God without this kind of light erred through very many
        byways.                                                                                             Cap. II.

**Q** How necessary this light is for those who wish to speak about God, experience will sufficiently
prove: if we wish to recall what delusions those who claimed the name of wise for themselves
invented without this very light: As Eusebius, Augustine, Laertius, and very many more recent authors well gather, but especially      Eu. Aug.
                                                                                                                                                Lae. Cic.
Cicero. For Thales of Miletus, who held the first place among the wise,      Thales.
said that water was the beginning of all things: but God was that mind which fashioned all things
from water. Anaximander asserted that the Gods were born, rising and setting at long intervals,
and also that there were innumerable worlds. Afterwards, Anaximenes established air as God:      Anaxi.
and that it was generated, and was immense, and infinite, and always in motion, as if air
without any form could be God. Anaxagoras, who received instruction      Anaxa.
from Anaximenes, was the first of all to wish the description and manner of all things to be
designated and completed by the power and reason of an infinite mind; nor does he proceed
further from that, so that it might be understood what this mind is and how it completed all things.
Alcmaeon of Croton gave souls and divinity to the Sun, Moon,      Croton.
and other stars. Pythagoras thought the soul was      Pythag.
stretched through all the natures of things and pervading them; and would that he had seen it as well
in himself as in others. Xenophanes (adding mind) wished everything that existed to be      Xenop.
God. Parmenides produced something fictitious similar to a crown, and calls

--- Page 146 ---
**OF THE FIRST SONG**

Democ. Democritus speaks, to know. Democritus counts images and their circuits among the gods. But since he denies anything to be eternal (because nothing always remains in its own state), does he not entirely abolish God and leave no opinion concerning Him?
Epicurus Epicurus, who watered his gardens from the springs of Democritus, thought of God as clothed in human form: because that [form] is the most beautiful of all, and alone suitable for reason and mind.
Cicero Whom Cicero demolishes with lengthy disputations and assails with many jests.
Aristote. Aristotle confuses many things, disagreeing with his sole master Plato: for at one time he attributes divinity to the mind, at another he says the world itself is God, at another he places a certain other [being] over the world, and attributes to it those parts, so that by a certain unfolding of the world, it may govern and protect its order. Then he says the ardor of heaven is God, not understanding that heaven is a part of the world,
Xenocr. which in another place he designates as God. Xenocrates says there are eight gods: five who are named in the wandering stars; One who [is formed] from other constellations as if from scattered limbs, the seventh the Sun, and the eighth the Moon.
Theoph. Theophrastus, with a certain inconstancy, at one time attributes divine supremacy to the mind, at another to heaven, then moreover to the signs and celestial constellations.
Strato Strato the philosopher considers all divine power to be situated in nature, which possesses the causes of generating, increasing, and decreasing, but lacks all sense and form.
Zeno Zeno considers natural law to be God, and that it possesses the power to command what is right and to prohibit what is contrary. And elsewhere he calls the aether God;
Aristo and in other places, a certain reason diffused through the nature of all things. His disciple Aristo says that the form of God cannot be understood, doubting entirely whether God is animate or not.
Cleantes Cleanthes, also a listener of Zeno, now says the world is God, now the mind, and judges this ultimate and highest ardor, diffused everywhere, and encompassing and embracing all things (which is named aether), to be the most certain God.
Perseus Perseus, another of his listeners, says that useful and salutary things are designated by the names of gods.
Plato Plato [says] that the incorporeal, what it can be, cannot be understood.
Xenop. Xenophon, as if coming to the same conclusion, reported Socrates disputing that the form of God ought not to be sought.
Antisthe. Antisthenes says that the popular gods are many, but the natural god is one.
Plato Plato also, disagreeing with Hermogenes, says: "By Jove, Hermogenes (if we had in mind the principal measure of rectitude), we would resolve to confess with ourselves that we know nothing about the Gods: neither about them themselves, nor about their names, by which they call themselves; for it is certain that they indeed call themselves by true names." Nevertheless, he confesses the Craftsman himself with his academics, and the generator of the universe:
August. And these (as Augustine says) our wise…

--- Page 147 ---
VOLUME ONE.                                                                                                                              5

He had spoken of such gods. Following him, Diogenes the Babylonian dreams many things about Minerva and the birth of Jupiter, and the origin of the Virgin. Cicero's Cotta seems to refute and mock all who speak of the gods: and his boat sails through so many waves that, as if submerged, having abandoned the sea and despaired of the harbor, almost shipwrecked, he struggles to conclude that the gods have obscure and difficult explanations.
I will omit those things which, poured forth by the voices of poets, more absurd, have harmed by their very sweetness: who introduced gods inflamed with anger and raging with lust, and made us see their battles and wounds: moreover, hatreds, dissensions, births, deaths, complaints, effusive lamentations, in all intemperance lusts, adulteries, chains, sexual intercourse with the human race, quarrels, hatreds, and many such insanities. But many have also descended to such madness: that they fashioned with their own hands the Gods whom they adored: as Hermes Trismegistus says of the Egyptians. Thus did the Assyrians, for whom the statue of Bel constructed by his son Ninus (as some believe) provided a reason for idol worship: whom the Moabites, Palestinians, and many peoples emulated, and they too fashioned their statues at will: and erected altars for themselves: and named them by a word of their own idiom.
      And if we cannot understand what God is, yet we are taught that God exists both by oracles, and by reason, and by the consensus of all.          Chapter III.
Therefore, speaking of God, we deem that saying of Dionysius to be observed, in which he says: That it is indeed permissible to ascend to higher things: as much as the ray of divine eloquence shall deign to insinuate itself: And that our powers must be prepared to absorb those divine splendors: moreover, that divine things ought to be revered by us innocently, soberly, piously, and chastely: lest if we wish to proceed by natural inquiry, we fall into various errors: just like those wise men of the world whom we mentioned above. Or let that happen which Simonides, whom Aristotle and Cicero sufficiently celebrate, experienced, who, when asked by Hiero the tyrant what God was, requested the space of one day: And returning the next day, when asked, Simonides requested two days. Then, as the tyrant asked more frequently, Simonides always doubled the number of days. But to Hiero asking why he did this, he replied: because the longer I consider it, the more obscure the matter seems: because He inhabits light inaccessible to human intellects. Hence the heavenly teacher testifies in the Gospel, which is titled according to Matthew, saying: No one knows the Son except the Father: nor does anyone know the Father, except the Son: and he to whom the Son wishes to reveal Him. Therefore, concerning this supersubstantial and most holy (as the Areopagite continues) it is not to be presumed to say anything or to think otherwise than as the sacred scriptures have very piously and chastely handed down. From these most sacred discourses, therefore, we have some things: to which some philosophers come with ready feet. But some things, which since they cannot attain, they either do not admit, or they evade them, or they leave them untouched as doubtful. Treating each of these, we will propose them thus: so that the pious may admit them with fair ears: but the impious, even if they do not admit them, at least cannot reject them. For these are placed in the first category of impiety by Porphyry, Iamblichus, and Proclus, who deny God

                                                                                                                              A v.

Marginal notes:
Cotta
Hermes Assyrians
Moab. Palest.
Diony.
Simon. Aristo. Cicero Hiero.
Christ
Diony.
Por. Iam. Procul.

--- Page 148 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

to exist. Having exploded these [arguments], rather than refuted them (for they cannot be considered worthy of refutation by wise men), we shall proceed. First (as divine oracles hand down to us), let us presuppose that God exists: from whom no philosopher dissents, nor any mortal
[Marginal note: David] being, unless he comes into that condition: concerning which the Prophet sings most wisely [Psalm] 1. "The fool has said (he says) in his heart, 'There is no God'": and very aptly are those called fools who deny God himself, since all reason dictates, and all light granted to mortals
teaches that God exists. For all created things, whose nature it is to depend on another, teach that there is something from which they themselves are: and that [something] from nothing, lest there be an infinite regress. And those things which are moved conclude that there is one [thing] from which all things are moved,
[Marginal note: Aristo.] which is not moved by another: as Aristotle well proceeds at the end of his book *On Physical Hearing*. And that [thing] is perfect, needing nothing: which is God, whether principle, or fount and origin of all things, or the highest, or infinite, or that than which nothing greater can be conceived, or the prime mover, or the first cause, or that which is from itself, or the Archetype, and containing all things, or by whatever other name it may be called, he
[Marginal note: Avicenna] himself is God. He who denies Him, no less, according to Avicenna, lacks reason than he lacks sense who denies snow to be white. For as Plato says in his *Laws*: The earth,
[Marginal note: Plato] Sun, Stars, and the universe itself, and the most ornate variety of seasons, distinguished by years and months, show that God exists. Moreover, the consensus of all Greeks and barbarians
[Marginal note: Cicero] agrees on this: Which Marcus Tullius (Cicero), running through it, says: "For what can be so clear and evident, when we have looked up at the sky and contemplated the celestial bodies, than that there is some divine power of outstanding mental acumen, by which these things are governed?" "For what nation is there, or what race of men, that does not have, without instruction, a certain anticipation of God, which they call *prolepsis*?"
[Marginal note: Epicurus] For from that divine volume of Epicurus *On the Rule and Judgment*, we have received that there is a certain pre-conceived notion for the reason of the soul, which we understand here: in which the nature of all agrees that God exists: and that he governs the world: To which he adds
[Marginal note: Pythag.] the illustrious deed of the Athenians, who burned the book of Pythagoras the sophist, in the beginning of which he seems to doubt whether God exists, having expelled him from the city and territory. But
[Marginal note: Eusebius] Eusebius, proceeding further, says: "We cannot doubt concerning God, since it is implanted in all by nature, indeed divinely, that God is the true creator of all things."

How, through the trace or image of created things: and their consonance with the Archetype, we can arrive at the knowledge of His fecundity. Chapter IIII.

[Large initial V]
In order that we may grasp that most divine fecundity, which is found shadow-like in all His handiwork, from these domestic things which we have at hand, at least individual things must be sketched: since there is nothing in the nature of things (according to Mer-
[Marginal note: Mercu.] cury) that does not bear some image of divinity. For all living things generate their offspring within themselves: and harmoniously bringing forth into the open what they conceived in their innermost parts, they utter the praises of the supreme artisan with a certain voice of their own.
To these hymns, all things invite [us], including the boys purified in the Babylonian furnace, and David, when he would bring his hymns to an end. For trees and plants, when they sprout

--- Page 149 ---
**FIRST THEME. 6**

...their shoots, or produce buds, they generate seed as if a fetus in their body. But when they yield fruit, as if by a kind of birth, they praise God with their own voice. Hail and snow are congealed in the air, and rains are prepared in the clouds, and then their conception occurs: but when they descend to earth, as if a completed offspring, they too bless the Creator. Animals generate a better offspring. But when they bring forth into the light, they too burst forth in praise of God. The sensitive faculty also conceives within itself the image and intention of things to be made, afterwards, by applying its limbs to the work, it brings forth what it had conceived. Which offspring of Imagination is closer to the soul than to the vegetative [faculty], which only occurs in the body: Therefore it more clearly shows the offspring of the divine mind. Thus the rational soul, when it receives power from the imaginative faculty, which measures all things to be done with due prudence, first by fabricating an exemplar of them in the mind, produces as it were an offspring in that same mind: which it brings forth externally: Where what has been conceived in the mind, it brings into its proper figure or form. Which conception, as an operative life, expresses (according to Augustine) the divine creative life, in which all things pre-existed before they were unfolded into their proper forms.
[Marginal note: August.]
But the work demonstrates the craftsmanship of the creator: Which, brought forth in harmonious order, sings praise to the creator himself, to whom it is assimilated in its operation. There is also another offspring of rational life similar to this, namely reason and discourse, which, formed in the mind from that thing which we know, is called the Word by the same Augustine.
[Marginal note: Idem]
Each of which offspring is closer to the soul than the conception of imagination or the vegetative faculty, because the rational faculty reflects into its own understanding, and through that, into itself. To these succeeds holy and free love: which Imagination does not effect. But it brings forth this offspring into the open: when it manifests what it had conceived by a sounding word. But since the angelic state is more perfect than that of those who still struggle in the arena, it brings forth a more excellent conception, unchanged by any interval: which, in bringing forth, it continuously perseveres in praises of God by a certain utterance. From all these things in the Creator, whose image they hold, we contemplate all things in their degrees: both the Word and the conception of creatures in the ideal life. But it reveals the essential Word when it manifests it in the sacred page: and the ideal Word, when it makes what it had fabricated in the mind shine forth in the work. Which is a certain way of saying and manifesting what has been conceived. Hence Moses and David, of whom the one wrote the secrets of God, the other sang them, declare all things to be produced by the Word.
[Marginal note: Moses David]

That God is full of the fecundity of all things and numbers: so that He can produce all things most harmoniously. Chapter V.

Mercury affirms that the elements and principles of nature, and also the whole beautiful world, have emanated from Him who is most full of the fecundity of all things and of both sexes, containing the whole power of generating without any external aid.
[Marginal note: Merc.]
Hence by the Poets He is called Pan (which means 'all'): whom the Arcadians, believing to be the sun, adored.
[Marginal note: poets]
He is indeed the true sun, not this celestial one, but supramundane and divine. And if it is permitted to pursue what [the poets] feigned about this Pan

--- Page 150 ---
CANTICLE ONE

Antiquity, which always handed down divine mysteries under enigmas, we will also examine its typical depiction. They first placed horns on its head, denoting the kingdom which it holds in the heavens and the underworld; for Jerome proves in a long series in the prayer of Habakkuk that a horn is accepted as representing a kingdom even [Marginal note: Hiero.] among those who wrote our sacred texts. But a long beard, extending down to the lowest parts, represented rays of light, or of its divine power. The lower part was shaggy because of trees, shrubs, mountains, rocks, and wild beasts; but the upper part was smooth. Whence it is also said to ride upon *haravah*, that is, plains; which our translation renders as "setting" (or "west"). A pipe of seven reeds sounds, that is, the harmony of the seven planets, in which are seven-fold sounds, which complete the perfect diapason, namely, consonance. The rod in its hands is power, by which it moderates all things. They depicted him laughing, hinting at his eternal happiness. And they asserted that he delighted in echo, which is a voice emitted in hollow places, or resounding from any arranged objects. For voice expresses word and the concept of the mind; therefore, by voice or word, God fashioned the world and all its parts, and by voice he governs, commanding. Therefore, he also manifests love to us with many cries; but he delights in reciprocal love (which is a resounding echo). And these are the delights which he has with the children of men. He wore a starry fawn-skin on his chest, because he contains the confluence and [Marginal note: Poete Philo.] power of all stars in a single skin, and by a single act or nod. But whom the Poets called Pan, that is, the whole, and containing all things, Philosophers called the first cause, and the principle of all [Marginal note: Procul.] causes, giving to all causes that they may flow forth; because whatever the second cause does, it acts in the virtue of the first, which is more influent than the second, says Proculus. And granted that a secondary universal cause also removes from a thing the power which it bestowed, the first cause by no means removes it. And further down it says: All things have their essence from the first being, and the first cause, and live from the first life, and immediately from the first and highest intelligence. It is necessary that this (intelligence) be fruitful of all those things which others bestow. [Marginal note: Speusi. August. Bo.tius Plato] And it is supremely happy and blessed in itself. But Beatitude (as Speusippus defines it) is a good accumulated from all goods. But blessed is he who needs nothing, and who has whatever he wills, if Augustine, Boethius, and Plato teach well. [Marginal note: Hermes] Therefore, nothing is lacking to him who contains all things, as the true sphere of all things, as Hermes said. And since nothing is outside the sphere of the world, so nothing is outside the divine embrace, which encompasses all things; to whom belongs that inexplicable name, where all the letters contain circular numbers, namely, ten, five, and six, each attesting that it is the truest sphere, which they name, containing all things within its embrace. The meanings of these letters also indicate the same thing: for *Ioth* is interpreted as knowledge or principle; *He* as being; *Vau* as "and itself," in which, namely, all things rest; so that [Marginal note: Procul.] it is the principle of all essences, providing to all that they may be, and being itself is the first of created things, as Proculus teaches. Therefore, it emanates from the first cause, to which alone is attributed the giving of being itself. Therefore, elsewhere it concludes with open mouth that all things pro- [Marginal note: Peripa.] ceed from one cause, which, first of all, must be pregnant with all things, if the Peripatetic (philosophy) is true.

--- Page 151 ---
TONVS PRIMVS. 7
Peripatetic maxim: No one gives what he does not have. Nor is anything produced by nature, or fabricated by art, unless it first pre-exists in the maker. An animal, or a human, is generated from a seminal virtue, which contained that which was generated: and from a seed is generated a plant which pre-existed in the seed by potency (as the Peripatetics say) or by some virtue. Hence the wisest philosopher Moses, when speaking of producing plants, [Marginal note: Moses] says: "Whose seed, namely, of the plant, is in it," that is, the seminal virtue for producing another plant. There also exists in the mind of the artisan an ideal form, from which he derives the external one: as Augustine explains at length, interpreting that passage of John, [Marginal note: August.] "what was made, in him was life," life indeed being creative, and the idea [Marginal note: Ioan.] of all things to be made. For just as a work of art lives in the mind of the artist before it is brought forth: so the world lived in that divine mind before it was brought into being. Moreover, it contains every number, being itself the true unity: which is the principle and root of all numbers, giving to all that they may be numbered. For every multitude (as the same Proclus says in his theological theorems) is from the one. [Marginal note: Procu.] Nor would anything be one, making a multitude together with others (as he continues there) unless through the participation of the one it acquired unity for itself. That one, and most ancient [being], no one doubts to be God, who, before communicating a particular unity to lower things, diffused himself into the first number: And hence into the denary (if we admit the theology of the Hebrews) as into ten ideas, and measures [Marginal note: Hebraei.] of all numbers, and of all things to be made: for this reason, a further number cannot be given, although Aristotle attempts to assign other manifold reasons. [Marginal note: Aristo.] Which denary, accumulated into one, returns to that from which it had its beginning. So that the denary is the end of numbers, and their completion, and the principle of decads. All things, imitating this series of numbers as a true exemplar, strive to return to that one from which they proceeded: As our Proclus somewhat further adds, saying: that every order beginning from unity proceeds [Marginal note: Procul.] into a multitude co-elemental with unity: and that same multitude of order is finally reduced to unity. And all things that are under the lunar sphere, through man as through the tenth genus of those things which are subject to corruption: And the nine heavens through the tenth heaven: which they call the Empyrean: and the nine orders of Angels through their decad are restored to the primary unity: Which we will discuss more broadly in its proper place.

That God is one. Chapter VI.

[Large decorative initial D] That God is one, we have the lawgiver thundering with divine oracle. [Marginal note: Moses.] "Hear, O Israel, you who indeed have God as your prince (for thus Israel is interpreted) the Lord your God is one God." And again he introduces Him protesting to the people: "See that I alone am He: and there is no other beside me." With whom agrees His, indeed, the law's singer, saying: "There is no God besides the Lord, and there is no God besides our God." [Marginal note: Dauid] With which truth all wise men agree. Abraham, because of his confession of one God,

--- Page 152 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

In the city, that is, he was thrown into the furnace by the Chaldeans, and escaped unharmed; therefore God favored him greatly, for whose sole glory he did not refuse to undergo death. For asserting this truth, Socrates endured both prisons and death:
[Marginal note: Apule. Aug. Ge.] as Apuleius and Aulus Gellius attest: yet no favor was obtained for himself, because he voluntarily brought death upon himself by taking poison, against the edict of that God whom he professed to be unique: who absolutely forbids anyone to inflict death both upon himself and upon others.
[Marginal note: Pl Tris Auic.] Plato proves in Timaeus, emulating Trismegistus, that God, the exemplar of the world, is one, because the world is one. Avicenna constantly asserts that it is impossible for there to be two self-existent necessities. Nor is anything else necessarily from itself, except God. Aristotle celebrates Homer's saying: A multitude of rulers is not good: Therefore, there is one Prince, and God.

--- Page 153 ---
**FIRST TONE. 8**

that the universe came forth into light. But other powers are to be considered ministers, which are outside God: and separated from Him. Hence the very ministers of God, separate intelligences, are called by philosophers and Hebrew sages. But we do not doubt that there are certain divine powers in God, which our people call attributes: wisdom, which the ancients named Pallas; Intelligence, or skillful discourse, Mercury; the Eternal, Saturn; the offspring of Form, Neptune, who is the power of the waters, concerning whom it is said: "Let the waters bring forth the creeping thing of a living soul" (as we follow the Hebrew words); the secret Nature of things, Juno; Love, Venus; Bright life, the Sun, or Apollo, and other things of that kind: which the common people believed to be many gods: which Cicero asserts in the book he published 'On the Nature of the Gods' to have been alien to all wise men. [Marginal note: Cicero] But Pliny calls it a kind of stupidity to consider innumerable gods: and to believe that marriages are contracted among them, and that no one is born from them in such a long age; and that some are very old, and always gray-haired; others young, and boys; of dark color, winged, born from an egg – this is almost the delusion of children. But beyond all impudence, that adulteries are feigned among them, then quarrels, and hatreds, and even that there are deities of thefts and crimes: which he certainly refutes well. But he teaches no less impiously than ignorantly about God: since we cannot speak rightly about Him without His light. Illuminated by this light, our theologians [Marginal note: Theol.] speak more confidently about Him: and prove His unity beyond all dispute: because the infinite does not at all permit another to stand with it, neither in mind, nor will, nor power, nor goodness, nor essence, which I leave to be read where they have been most copiously treated by them. They also add concerning the power by which He can do all things: Hence, if there were two, one could destroy what the other had built: and if he could not, he would not be God: who is omnipotent. And proceeding, they reason that since each would enjoy the other, being supremely enjoyable, and one unwilling to enjoy would be deficient. But one enjoying would receive something from another, as if imperfect: and thus the most perfect God would be imperfect: and still further. If there are two, which of them built this machine? And which of them governs it? And if he who made it, also rules it, what does the other do? But if one made it, and the other governs it, how did the governor enter a house not his own? Therefore, from the order and governance, let us conclude [Marginal note: Diony. Plato Philo. Aſtro.] with Dionysius, Plato, with all true philosophers and astronomers, that the maker and ruler of so many things agreeing with each other is the same: who is the craftsman of all, having all power, foreseeing all things.

That that most fertile first mind, which is called God, produced both within and without. Chapter VII.

[E] LED by these created images to the most eminent and most fertile divine mind, illuminated by its light, we shall see a progeny most similar to itself, who is the true image of the Father: whom it first generates in itself by a unique and never-interrupted act: by which it always understands itself to be the supreme good by essence, without any intermission or change.

--- Page 154 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

From this results an offspring, which is full intelligence, a full image of itself, and a complete exemplar of the world.
[Marginalia: Io. Mer. Plato] Which offspring John and Mercury named the Word:
[Marginalia: Orph.] Plato [named] the Son of God the Father: but Orpheus [named it] Pallas, that is, wisdom born from Jupiter's head. From which full intelligence, love of its supreme goodness is produced, binding intelligence with mind, and all the more so, by how much an immense proportion it is more intimate to itself than other offspring are with their parents. Hence it is the most exact image of the parent, yet by a certain distinction, or by some intrinsic absolute, as if generated, distinct from the generator. And unless there were generation in that supreme Prototype, there would not be an image of generation in created things: Nor would a sterile and unfruitful [being] have given
[Marginalia: Isaias] fecundity to its creations: as through Isaiah, concerning the unbelievers, it complains with a certain impatience, saying: "I who grant generation to others, shall I be sterile?" Therefore,
[Marginalia: Ricar.] in the supreme artisan, there is a seed and fecundity: Because (if it exists, says Richard, most delightfully happy), nevertheless, from its inherent goodness, that most happy mind willed to openly produce this offspring of its own by constructing a fabric full of its image: In which, spreading itself out in an ordered series of degrees, it made some capable of its propagation and happiness: Of whom, some by only momentary subjection, others however by a longer struggle, it ordained to become sharers of its happiness, assigning to each their due habitations. But because those [the former] were to soon after attack the creator of things, it did not assign to them hospices for pilgrimage, nor any other field for instantaneous battle except the palace of triumph. To mortals, however (for whom it had declared a long war with various enemies), it gave wide spaces for struggle and opportune lodgings. And because united with an alterable and fallible nature, it took care to provide fodder and sustenance, by which they might draw the course of life to its due end. All these things, prepared at an opportune time, it committed to the elements and the heavens, as most obedient ministers, commanding also, for the delight of this very dwelling, that fields be extended, valleys exist, forests be covered with foliage, stony mountains rise: And other things of that kind: which we perceive to be ordered more for beauty and adornment than for necessity: So that from these delights, which the guest would feel in such hospices of servitude, he might ascend to contemplate those most exquisite ages, which are prepared in the triumphal hall. For it recognized the unhappiness of this bodily prison: in which those most absolute goods, free from all degenerating matter, can only be conceived through sensible things, unless they are revealed by a particular light. Therefore, with supreme artifice, it arranged harmonious images of those celestial things: so that through these, the veil of ignorance or sin being easily drawn away, we might be drawn to the celestial things themselves:
[Marginalia: Orige.] and from the beauty of the works and the adornment of creatures (as Origen writes in Periarchon), we might understand the parent of the universe. This especially, since a more proper nature of the image is found in man: who alone among mortals (as the Platonists say)
[Marginalia: Platoni] possesses the likeness of the divine mind. But the animal holds the likeness of man: the zoophyte [holds the likeness] of the animal: but the plant [holds the likeness] of the zoophyte: and metals [hold the likeness] of the plant: stones [hold the likeness] of metals. And because things inferior to man contain an imperfect image of God, di-

--- Page 155 ---
TONVS PRIMVS. 9

...And because inferior things contain an imperfect image of God, Catholic Sages say that all those things hold the trace of God, through which they represent a more imperfect deiform species: [Marginal note: Catholi.] each one more and less according to the perfection distributed to them. For the most tenuous forms of elements and mixtures are simulacra of the highest good. But living things, the heavens, and stars, especially the Sun, lead to contemplating more secret things. But rational minds, as the supreme degree of images, entering the innermost sanctuaries, arrive at that degree of contemplation by which they may one day enter the prepared bridal chamber: indeed, they may constitute themselves as the dwelling place and temple of God, where a true symposium is celebrated with all musical harmonies.

That God created the world. Chapter VIII.

**I**NTER those things which lie hidden from human intellects and transcend natural reasoning, is the generation of the world: whether it exists, if it had a beginning, and if necessarily, or by some free outpouring of the divine mind. Hence the wise are divided into various factions. Aristotle, with that crowd [Marginal note: Aristo.] who admit nothing unless they are able to investigate it with their own strength and intellect, being unable to understand whence and why this generation occurred, rejects it: and as an ungrateful disciple, he falsely accuses Plato, saying that he alone posits the world to be generated. But Plato himself, with other wise men enlightened by a better light, professes the creation of the world: [Marginal note: Plato.] and this (creation) to be most harmonious and arranged with the fullest numbers: under the veil of which, and by obscure indications for those whose senses are receding, he concealed the mysteries of the world from those not yet well initiated. He deemed it better to skillfully unravel what has been received through divine oracles, than to labor in vain with his own intellect to apprehend those things which escape the grasp of rational discourse: and are only received by a pure, joyful, and festive harmony of mind. Hence Mercury, embracing the mind and introducing these inner mysteries, [Marginal note: Mercu.] hints in a few words in his Pymander at the creation of the world, and its governors, and all composite things, and the pure artifice of nature from the elements tending downwards, yet united to the mind of the Creator. He teaches that these elements, cast forth, pre-exist by God's will alone in a lower condition than in the Creator. But Empedocles of Agrigentum, and Heraclitus of Ephesus, [Marginal note: Emped. Heracli.] assert that the world is generated and corrupted not once, but continuously. Which, according to parts, or a certain renewal hidden from those not enlightened, could be admitted into the bosom of truth. But Democritus teaches that the world is generated: and will perish once, [Marginal note: Democ. Hesiod Orph. Thales. Pythag. Hiero. Auicena Algazel Philo. Alcinous] and will never be repaired further. Hesiod also and Orpheus sing of the world as having been brought forth. Thales, one of the seven wise men, asserts this orb to be the work of God. Pythagoras, and his interpreter Hierocles, profess God as the maker and father of things. Avicenna the Arab, Algazel the Saracen, Philo (most famous no less for his doctrine than for his Greek eloquence), Alcinous the Platonist, who says: "This entire world must necessarily be the most beautiful work of God," agree. And many later ones, whom it would be tedious to recount. Hence Plato does not alone generate the world, [Marginal note: Plato] but he himself, with many, testifies that it was generated. But omitting external authors, let us come to those,

B

--- Page 156 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

who teach not those things which they imagine, but those which they saw, and which they received from divine oracles.
Moses. For Moses is the father of theologians, and the chief teacher of philosophers, "In the beginning," he says, "God created heaven and earth, and the other things which follow." To this most complete God, and holy, vitalized divine power, who in many places proves those things which he said, more belief is to be given than to Aristotle, who confirms his trifles of this kind neither by reasons, nor by miracles, nor by oracles. But the means by which Moses corroborates those things which he teaches, are: Miracles, wonders, oracles, prophecies. The consensus of the parts of the whole doctrine, the weighty authority of those who confirm his doctrine, and approve it by interpreting. Miracles are manifest. A rod is transformed into a serpent, and the serpent again into a rod. He turned waters into blood. Frogs, Flies, and Gnats, or Lice (as it is held among the Hebrews) summoned, they come to harass men and beasts. In this the Memphitic Magi failed: because neither they themselves nor the demons summoned by them could produce the matter of the lice: which is human sweat, or heated fluid: since it is for God alone to create the subject matter. Therefore they professed that the finger and power of God was there, producing anew: That the rod of Aaron, and
M

--- Page 157 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 10

Tertullian, and Eusebius cited: who testify to the truth of the aforesaid miracles. [Marginal note: Ter. Euf.]
Let us proceed further to prophecies: Concerning which Ptolemy in his *Fructus*, only those inspired by divine power [Marginal note: Ptolem.]
predict particulars. And Isaiah says: "Declare what is to come, [Marginal note: Isaias]
and we will say that you are gods." Hence, if Moses teaching, and his followers, the pro-
phets, all prophesied so many particulars to the Memphitic king, to those tribes, to princes, and to many
kings, concerning themselves, concerning their cities, and concerning their peoples, who
would doubt that they were inspired by holy divine power? Who would accuse them of falsehood? Who
would doubt their doctrine? Let the text of Moses be read; all things are full of prophecies and future [Marginal note: Moses]
events, so much so that he omitted nothing of those things pertaining to the mysteries
of philosophical and divine matters, of the future Messiah, and of all things that were to
come to pass, as is manifest to those who know the law and whose eyes are enlightened: which things
he unveiled under a veil (as those mysteries required). For who, being sane, would, neglecting these things,
turn to the monuments of philosophers, which are confirmed neither by reasons nor by oracles,
nor sprinkled with the fragrance of divine things? Nevertheless, we admit those things which true philosophers
teach and which do not differ from Mosaic institutions. But those things which, by sole
authority alone, or by mere invention, fortified by no reasons and no passages, they bring
against those things contained in the sacred scriptures, we utterly reject. For if we wish to defer to authors:
to whom, I ask, do we think more deference should be paid, to Aristotle, Alexander, [Marginal note: Aristo. Alexan.]
Averroes, Epicurus, and the like, who shine with only a few sparks of doctrine, [Marginal note: Auerrois Epicuro.]
or to Moses, the prophets, Solomon, the wisest of all, the Evangelists, the Apostles, [Marginal note: Mos. p Sal. Euã.]
who with doctrine, wisdom, morals, prophecies, oracles, prodigies, and all manner of holy
sanctity, shine forth like most ardent torches? Those who assert what they say about divine matters,
prove it at the risk of their lives, and confirm it with prodigies. But concerning human
and inferior things, speaking above men, penetrating all secrets with the ray of holy divine power,
they reveal them to posterity with clear light. Concerning these, Eusebius says, [Marginal note: Eusebius]
"The errors of the philosophers you will recognize not from myself, but from the wonderful contradiction and struggle among
them; whom, when I compare them among themselves or with others, I would not easily deny that they were illustrious men:
But when I compare them with the philosophers
and theologians of the Hebrews, and compare their doctrine with the doctrine of those, all things that the philosophers devised seem to me fleeting and
frivolous. Nor is it surprising: those things were divinely
published, these humanly. Hence, those who wished to taste the first fruits of wisdom
were compelled to be taught by them (as we said above). I could also cite as witnesses to Moses
and Hebrew doctrine Apion of Alexandria, Porphyry, Alexander [Marginal note: Ap. Ale. Porph.]
Polyhistor, Eupolemus, Theophrastus, the Sibylline books, the Oracles [Marginal note: Al. pol. Euf. Th.]
of Apollo, Clearchus the Peripatetic, Megasthenes, Strabo, Justin, Cor- [Marginal note: Lib. sib. Or. ap.]
nelius Tacitus, Demetrius Phalereus, Hecataeus of Abdera, Orpheus and [Marginal note: Cle. peri. Mega.]
Solinus. But leaving the sayings of others in their proper places, let us adduce only a few from Porphyry and Or- [Marginal note: Str. Iu. Cor. ta.]
pheus, and Solinus, out of many. For Porphyry, in his book on [Marginal note: De. ph. c. Ab.]
abstinence, praises extensively the religious men or prophets of the Hebrews, calling [Marginal note: Or. So. Porphy]
them philosophers, and preferring them to all other prophets and those professing sanctity.
                                                                                                                                B ij

--- Page 158 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

**Orph. prefacing.** But Orpheus, in the book which he wrote concerning the sacred word, thus sings (having first excluded the despisers of laws and divine things):
One perfect God there is, who created all things:
Cherishing all things, and himself sustaining himself above all things,
Who is grasped by mind alone: who is seen by mind:
And who never brings any evil upon mortals:
Besides whom there is no other: you shall see all things,
Whereby you may better discern him here on earth.
For here I see his footprints: and I see his strong hand:
But to discern him himself, who he is,
I am utterly unable, for he dwells in high clouds.
No one saw him except a certain one born of Chaldean blood:
Whom the golden and sublime seat of the heavens holds:
Whose right hand extends to the ends of the Ocean:
Whom from their deepest roots the shaken mountains tremble:
Nor, although they are of immense weight, can they bear him:
Who, inhabiting the high peaks of heaven:
Yet is never absent from the earth.
He is the beginning, and also the middle, and the same end.
The voices of the ancients taught us all these things:
Which God once delivered to them on two tablets.

**Orpheus** Behold how Orpheus declares with an open voice that he learned from the Mosaic tablets what he sings about God, known only to Moses, who was born of Chaldean blood: although some are of the opinion that Orpheus sang of Noah; others of Enoch; the Platonists of Zo-
**Didym.** roaster, who was the son of Ham and grandson of Noah, as Didymus says: but Ham himself was the son of Noah, if Berosus is to be believed. For the tablets were not given to these, but to Moses, concerning whom alone it is read that he spoke with God face to face: Many, taught by his doctrine and emulating him, dedicated themselves to a holy life: such as the prophets and those who
**solinus** sought to receive wisdom with enlightened eyes: concerning whom Solinus (says): The interior parts of Judea, which face the west, the Essenes inhabit: who, endowed with a memorable discipline, separated from the custom of all nations, and destined to this way of life by the providence of divine majesty (as I believe). No women there: They entirely renounced sexual relations, they know not money, they live on palms. No one is born there: yet the multitude of men does not diminish. The place itself is devoted to chastity: To which, although many from all nations hasten, no one is admitted unless one whom the faith of chastity and the merit of innocence accompanies: For he who is guilty, even of a slight fault, although he may wish to gain entry with utmost effort, is divinely removed. For he speaks of the disciples of Moses, and the sons of the prophets and the prophets themselves:
**Paul.ap.** concerning whom also our Paul, disputing with the Hebrews themselves, says: They wandered about in sheepskins and in goatskins, needy, distressed, afflicted: of whom the world was not worthy.

--- Page 159 ---
          FIRST TONE.                                  11

Wandering in solitudes, in mountains, and caves, and caverns of the earth: Who were found worthy of that testimony, which is not undeservedly deemed worthy of belief. But what is admirable beyond measure is the harmonious doctrine of the heavenly and divine message of Jesus, the true Messiah, anointed with divine charisms above all his fellows: Who, approving and admitting the teaching of Moses, revealed many secrets held by the Father to his disciples: which he presented to the common people under parables, lest that which is holy be given to dogs. These disciples so filled the whole world: that all those wise men who everywhere claim the name for themselves, embrace and revere that doctrine: in which so much divinity, and so much divine light shines, that it easily transcends all human inventions: Let all of us who care for wisdom embrace this (doctrine), because no more sublime one has yet appeared to mortals, nor will appear: Nor let us expect (as with Firmianus

--- Page 160 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

The condition of the world does not allow philosophers to conclude against its origin. Cap. IX.

[Marginal note: Aristotle.]
[Large initial P] eripatetics, who are common in these times, not de-
parting from their senses, believe that nothing can stand or be known unless they
prove it by syllogizing from sensible things with the same demonstration that Aris-
totle outlined, but which he nowhere preserved in natural progress: since all his de-
ductions proceed from pre-accepted principles. But omitting other things, let us come to those
arguments which present the strongest fourfold strengths against the origin of the world. But what can
[Marginal note: Origen,]
(to speak with Origen) they bring forward against truth itself that is not shown to be inept,
invalid, and false, since they propose certain ravings, supported neither by rea-
son nor worthy of even a prudent man? Which, indeed, we are (with God's help)
going to overturn as easily as they lightly objected. And so that we may omit more trivial
things (although all that they bring forward are unreliable), we will first bring forward the rea-
sons which they deduce from the very nature of the world against the world's creation. They contem-
plated the heavens as entirely separated from contraries: hence they concluded that it could in no way
be corrupted, and consequently not generated. Moreover, they saw that things which are generated
acquire a new place for themselves: but

--- Page 161 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 12

matter, which the natural agent requires; nor because it operates from contrary to contrary, that the supreme artisan should also proceed in the same way. From where, I ask, did those learn these inferences, who taught that art is distinguished from nature, and that natural things belong to one kind of doctrine, and eternal things, separated from motion, to another? For the artisan introduces an artificial form, and presupposes a natural one. But the natural agent introduces a substantial form, and presupposes matter, which is an effect of God: And if God in operating required something beforehand, He would also require a prior God, who would have produced that; and thus there would first be something prior. What then are these monstrous arguments? They also reason fallaciously, while from the possession of a new place which something newly generated acquires, they wish to exclude the world from generation, because it acquired no place. But granting that it acquired a place for itself, I would say it acquired the same place in which it now is. For it is around the center either of the earth, or of the world, or of that intellectual sphere, whose center (as Hermes says) is [Marginal note: Hermes] everywhere. Moreover, that they maintain every new thing must be reduced to something ancient, we grant to them. And that ancient thing is the divine mind, by which all things are contained, before they are unfolded into their proper forms; and when unfolded, it moderates and preserves them. That they add that every natural transmutation occurs from matter into matter, we admit: but in the primal production, and absolute from all laws of nature, by which the ruler is not bound by right, this is not required. Moreover, that every product first pre-exists in some potentiality, we grant: but natural things in matter; but the world itself, and the species of things, in ideas, or in those exemplars [Marginal note: Platoni. Ioan.], in which the Platonists, together with our John, far transcending the Peripatetics, agree, who says: "What was made, in him was life": where it had being in potentiality. Nor are the ideas of Plato monsters, O Aristotle; but they are the eyes of a bat (as you say), if they do not see those things which are most manifest in nature, or in nature's author. And so that we may dissolve the strongest knot of natural philosophers: that from nothing, nothing is made: I would wish them to be asked to explain this opinion of theirs, since it is ambiguous. For if its sense is, that from nothing, nothing is made by art or nature, which require a subject in which they operate: we readily agree. But what does this have to do with the supreme artisan, whom nature emulates at a great distance; just as art (emulates) nature itself, as Aristotle with his Averroes agree? [Marginal note: Aristo. Auerrois] And just as in being, so also in operation, the determined natural agent, subject to motion, time, and succession, falls short of Him who is absolute from all laws of nature. If, however, they understand "from nothing," that is, "after not being, nothing is made," they have left this to posterity to prove; whence a wide field for denying is left to us, since it is neither proven, nor is it evident in itself. If, however, they mean that that "nothing" excludes every kind of cause, even this we grant: But in the generation of the world, we presuppose an operative and supreme cause: which contains matter, subject, forms to be given, instruments, disposing qualities, and all things which are required for bringing about any work, by its own infinite power.

B iiij

--- Page 162 ---
CANTICLE THE FIRST

Nor does the same motion achieve. Cap.X.

[Decorative Initial P]ersisting still, the Peripatetics, in their speculations of natural
things, and having in view that motion is in that which is moved,
or generated, or in the subject of transformation: and since no
subject of that ancient and primeval production was present, they conclu-
ded that it could not have been: nor is it surprising if they erred, since they were unwilling to depart
(Augustine) from sensible things: From which (says Augustine) sincere truth is not to be expected.
(Proclus) Nor from these, or from reasons founded on them, can we (as Proclus testifies) ar-
rive at the knowledge of divine things: which are intellectual, removed from matter, motion,
succession, and from all senses. Hence they wandered from those foul and dete-
rior generations to the divine workmanship, which transcends every path of nature, arguing.
They attach something frivolous and inept, namely that rectilinear motion
cannot be perpetuated: because it would traverse infinite space, which na-
ture by no means sustains. Circular motion, however, because it does not traverse anything in-
finite, can be perpetual: But in eternal things (as they say), the deduction from 'can be' to 'is' is
valid: Hence they thought to prove the eternity of the world. Oh, a beautiful deduc-
(Averroes) tion, presupposing the eternal which they pretend to prove! The blasphemous
Arab adds that it would be impossible for the world to have any other disposition than it now has.
Treacherous dog, who revealed this to you? By what measure have you measured the power
of the artisan? By what authority do you presume to limit the power of the infinite, so that it can-
not both destroy and create at will? This blasphemous beast should rather be
hissed off when it presumes to speak of divine things, than listened to or deemed
(Albertus Magnus) worthy of satisfaction. To him, however, Albertus, surnamed the Great, replies,
filled with a deeper philosophy than Averroes. We will say (he says) that the motion of the heavens
terminates in another state of the world, and in rest itself, towards which (as
(Averroes) (Aristotle) Aristotle teaches) all motion tends. Hence Averroes' reasoning falls, and his
(Aristotle) fiction is resolved by itself. But because motion generates time: and time itself is the measure of motion
and rest: Hence they also paralogize from the aspect of time: If the world (they say)
did not exist before it took its beginning, since that 'before' is something of time, there-
fore time preceded motion, which is its cause and progenitor. They also add that,
given any instant, that instant is the beginning of future time and the end of past time,
therefore time existed before that first instant, and consequently motion and the world.
This whole error proceeds from a poor understanding of words, while they restrict that 'before'
to signify only some part of time: For among our own, and even among the most
skilled foreigners in the art of speaking, we see that 'before' signifies something other than a part of time:
For sometimes it signifies eternity, as that in
(Proverbs) Proverbs: 'The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his ways, before
(Ecclesiasticus) he made anything.' And in Ecclesiasticus: 'From the beginning, and before the ages, I was created.'
(Ovid) Among the Sulmonian [Ovid] it is also said: 'Before the sea, and the lands, and the heaven
that covers all things.' Nor was that most sagacious one ignorant that time [comes] from the circuit of the heavens

--- Page 163 ---
TONVS PRIMVS. 13

to flow: yet it says "before the sky, which covers all things." It also signifies the front part of a place: hence *anteambulones* (those who walk before), and *antesto* (I stand before). It also signifies a higher rank, from which *Antistes* (a prelate), who is superior to others, comes. And since that "before" has so many meanings: why do they want to restrict it to signifying only a part of time? Would they not also concede that matter exists before form in a certain order, even if it did not precede it in time? Thus God was before the world in eternity, and in a certain order. But what they add, that an instant is the end of the past and the beginning of the future, Algazel resolves by saying: [Marginal note: Algazel] As a point exists in continuous things, so an instant exists in successive things: a point, however, is sometimes the end of part of a line, and the beginning of another part; sometimes it is the beginning of an entire line, and not the end of a preceding part. Thus that instant, in which the world had its beginning, was the beginning of the time that followed, and not the end of a past time. The Arab denies the similitude: because time passes, a line remains. [Marginal note: Auerrois] Oh, what a ridiculous solution: since the similitude is not about transition and permanence, in which they differ: but about the indivisible part in which they agree. For all things that agree in something, differ in another: as is trivial even to novices in their doctrines.
They add something seemingly obvious: "That which flows," they say, "has something before it and something after it." But (to bring forth something from the storehouses of nature and God) we say more: namely, that everything that flows returns to that from which it had the beginning of its flow. For water returns to the sea from which it drew its origin, as the wisest Solomon teaches: [Marginal note: Salomon] and experience proves. The body to the earth, from which it was taken. The spirit, and all things made by God, return to the same from which they were begotten. "All things produced," says Proclus, [Marginal note: Procul.] "make a circle, beginning from God, and ending in God Himself." Thus also time returns to the same eternity from which it flowed: which will remain when time ceases, just as it pre-existed before time. Hence, to Avicenna asking how the Creator preceded the making of the world, [Marginal note: Auicen.] we will say with Augustine, [Marginal note: Auguſt.] certainly a most upright philosopher: that He preceded it by that eternal duration. Plotinus also (although he taught many things beyond human understanding, [Marginal note: Plotinus] as he drew from the springs of Ammonius, [Marginal note: Ammo.] and he from those who were taught by divine oracles) makes a paralogism concerning this duration of the world, when he says: "That which is resolved into another is dissected; but since there is nothing beyond the world into which it can be resolved, it will endure forever." To whom we say: The world is resolved according to its parts, so that it may persevere in a better state; but we are not presently disputing about its resolution, since the discussion is about its generation: nor does it disagree with our religion that God's creation should endure perpetually, so that we may agree with Plato [Marginal note: Plato] and Plotinus: [Marginal note: Plotinus] who consider it an impiety for those things to perish which proceeded immediately from blessed God. Hence we also assert the soul to be immortal, because it was produced and inspired by God. The body will also attain eternity, if it takes on the nature of the soul: as we will discuss elsewhere.

B v

--- Page 164 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**
Likewise, its governors attribute less. **Chapter XI.**

[Marginal note: Astro.] [Decorative initial O containing a figure of a scholar] The supporters of the world also believed that the intelligences moving the spheres attain happiness in the perpetual revolution of the heavens: as Aristotle seems to suggest in his higher philosophy, where, repeating higher principles, he contends more fiercely for this eternity of the world. To whom John Scotus concedes more, perhaps interpreting his words better than he himself conceived them: because they are blessed not only by moving the orbs, but while (by means of that revolution) performing the office of God, they communicate perfection to lower things. What Plotinus says, discussing the heavens and the soul of the world, agrees with this: For it is indeed absurd to think that the soul, which contained the heaven for a time, would not also always do the same, as if it had contained it by violence. And having progressed a little, he says: What can be the cause for the world to cease at some point? For the elements of the world are not worn out like wood and other things of this kind; and since these always remain, the universe also remains. Here, speaking of future permanence, he presupposes that it has always existed. Hence he further infers that it will always endure, because the dominion of its soul cannot be dissolved, nor its nature weakened: And Aristotle also considers this important: because the ruler of this worldly house, since he is eternal, not undergoing change, his house also seems to be eternal. And since its governors do not labor, nor are they tired by revolving, being devoted to eternal motion, they will never rest. To refute these things, we say there is an error of equivocation, arguing from the immediate to the ultimate end. Almost all things are ordered to diverse ends, but only to one ultimate end. For animals, the immediate end is to live and to feed, but the ultimate end is to serve man: who (in the opinion of many wise men) is the end of all lower things. But the immediate end of man is to govern the house, the republic, the family, to trade, to study, and things of that kind; but the ultimate end is to come to God, or to happiness, whether through Stoic virtue, or Peripatetic speculation, or through Academic purification, or through faith and grace, as our Catholics assert. But for intelligences separated from God and from corruptible matter, the immediate end is to govern the heavens and men, and other things committed to them; but the ultimate end is in the contemplation of the first substance, where they are blessed: as Aristotle himself states in his Ethics. Let it be, therefore, that they rest from motion and from a lower end, yet they will not cease from blessedness: just as man will not be less happy if he does not govern the republic and lower things. For it is indeed astonishing that anyone should think those minds are blessed in continuous motion: since all motions (as they themselves also teach) tend towards rest: and greater progress in wisdom is made by resting in studies and on benches, than in motion. Nor will they cease because they labor, but with the work perfected and completed, and having rendered to lower things the favor they owed. Nor will the soul, of which Plotinus speaks, cease to provide life to the universe by ceasing from motion. Nor do we assert the annihilation of its elements or parts, but rest from motion: so that it may finally be brought back after many revolutions into the sabbatical

--- Page 165 ---
**VOLUME ONE.**                                                                                                14

rest, closed off even to many wise men. Nor will the Creator regret when he ceases from his perfect work: just as (as the sacred scriptures attest) he rested from all the work which he had created, when the fabric of the world was completed: so that it may be true what the philosophers themselves teach, that all motion tends towards rest. Nor will the prince of this worldly atrium be shaken, reigning in rest. Therefore, let all wise men who perpetually investigate the end of the worldly machine fix their feet here: lest, running after incessant motion with incessant fantasizing, they never rest: nor, hindered by continuous running, be able to see their own rest with any light.

Nor do they prove the intention by proceeding from the Creator. Cap. XII.

**C**UM again, from this new generation of the world, a new relation seems to be introduced into the Creator from the novelty of the work, and consequently a certain change in nature or will, which cannot happen to the most perfect and unmoving being: neither from within, because nothing can move itself, nor from without, because it would suffer from it with the defilement of the most perfect and infinite being. Many arguments of this kind are brought forward by Aristotle, Averroes, Moses Aegyptius, [Marginal note: Aristo. Auerrois Mo. egy. Cicero] and their followers: which Cicero, inveighing against Plato, wove together into one in his eloquent speech: "With what eyes of the mind," he says, "could your Plato behold that fabric of such a great work, which he makes to be constructed and built by God? What effort? What tools? What levers? What machines? Who were the ministers of such a great task? How could air, water, fire, and earth obey the Architect? From where arose so many suitable forms for producing the mind and generating the senses?" And having progressed a little from these points, I ask: why did the builders of the world remain dormant for innumerable ages? For even if there was no world, there were some ages: even if not those which are completed by the number of days and nights in annual courses (for I confess that these could not have been made without the world's revolution), there was certainly from infinite time a certain eternity, which no circumscription of times measured: However, of what kind that space was, cannot be understood: for it does not even fall within the realm of understanding, that there was some time when no time existed. Therefore, in such an immense space, why did providence cease? Was it fleeing labor? What was it, moreover, that God should desire to adorn the world with signs and lights like an architect? If so that God himself might dwell better: before, he dwelt in darkness as if in a hovel: If we think he delights in variety, because we see he adorned heaven and earth: What kind of delight of God can this be, which he could have lacked for so long? Or are these things, as you generally say, established by God for the sake of humans? For the wise, or for the foolish? If for the wise, then such a great effort of things was made for the sake of a few: If for the foolish, then first there was no reason: that he should deserve well of the wicked. Then what has he achieved, when all have become foolish? What can we say is more miserable than foolishness? Thus far Cicero. Alcinous adds: "Since nothing remains outside the world that could inflict force, [Marginal note: Alcinous] it will not suffer disease or any dissolution: And since it will endure perpetually: therefore it was also perpetual." Avicenna adds: "An agent acting by the power of another now..." [Marginal note: Auicena]

--- Page 166 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

he can produce what before he could not, because the favor of the co-agents must be awaited by him. But he who operates by his own power ought not to wait, but to act continuously. The servants of the world contend for the dignity of their prince, so that, continuously addicted to revolution, they may never attain to the rest in which true happiness lies. But we, as legitimate soldiers, will contend for the supreme artificer, who is our peace and rest, defending his eternal rest, towards which all the world's revolution is directed. Against which rest, and against the wall of truth, how weak the machines he has erected, will immediately appear.
[Scotus] We grant to Aristotle that a new relation may arise, but one of reason, as Scotus, a man of keenest judgment, thinks.
[Mic. Cas.] But Michael Cassian grants more, that it be real, not indeed new, but eternal, with his eternal will for the world's creation, to which he comes at will. And I wonder about this instance of a new relation arising, since new things are continuously produced, from which a new relation arises, either to God as creator or as governor, or at least (as they themselves say) as a beloved and desired end. Why then is a relation of a new world against God's majesty, and not one of new parts?
[Algazel] Nor does that splendor of the Saracens, Algazel—he who himself contends for the world's newness and rest—consider it an inconvenience that the most perfect agent, with all cited conditions for producing an effect, may delay as long as he wishes, and then produce, with no newness accruing to him.
[Philosophers] Nor do the Philosophers prove by their demonstration that, with those things arranged, an effect follows in God, who
[Averroes] acts freely, as we shall immediately declare, fortified by his arguments. Nevertheless, the impious Arab rises up against him in vain here and elsewhere, anticipating what all wise men would deny; whence those Arabic fictions are indeed childish delusions, so that his faithful
[The same Algazel] interpreter, compelled by truth, considers him himself foolish, and all his reasons. Averroes alleges that Algazel directed war against the philosophers, hindered by a frenetic disease, or by an error of laws. O mad and senseless one, after you try with so much labor to solve the reasons which one suffering from lethargy brings forth. Moreover, you wickedly blaspheme the most holy laws uttered by divine mouth, and you dare to accuse of error those things which are full of divinity: You now see for yourself. Nor do I cry out for you, but for adolescents and those not yet initiated, who, not perceiving the most hidden
[Plato] reasons of divine things—which are scarcely discerned even with long time, most exquisite diligence, and a purified
[The same] mind (as Plato and the wise testify)—easily go astray in such matters. Therefore, with Plato, we exhort you young people not to rashly pronounce judgment concerning divine things and the sacraments of the world, because at the first glance of things, nothing but the sensible is offered. But those who rely on the senses, with darkened minds, not perceiving the deepest secrets of God and nature, either hiss at religion or cast it behind their back; and these consider themselves great men if they claim for themselves the name of Averroists, or Aristotelians, or Epicureans (and would that it were falsely so), who have not even offered the profound sacraments of religion: Averroes especially, into whose malicious soul this wisdom disdained to dwell and enter. And some ridiculous people consider themselves great when they are thoroughly imbued with Averroes's doctrine: Whose do-

--- Page 167 ---
TONVS PRIMVS.                                     15

Averroes’s doctrine has something on its surface that attracts: something that seems unassailable, plausible, and useful. But when you examine more deeply, you will see all things false, unfaithful to the master, impious in every worship, with few exceptions, in which he could not deviate from the teacher. But leaving Averroes aside, to whom a shared error led us, let us come to Aristotle, who, less removed from piety, confesses religion to be inherent in human nature: he asserts God to be the originator of this machine, and its moderator, and also its maker, in that which he published about the world, although where he proceeds by sensible arguments, he denies that which he cannot reach by the same arguments: [Marginal note: Ariſtot.] Who, proceeding with some piety in this matter, says: An agent, whether from purpose or from nature, if it is good, operates well as far as it can: this especially when it is hindered by no obstacle, because good (as Dionysius also teaches) is by its nature communicative. [Marginal note: Diony.] Let us follow him, proceeding no less piously than acutely, with due progress. An agent, by its own works and industry, strives with all its might to attain the good it aims for: But the good, distributing, divides how and when it wills, if Paul teaches truth, who (when he was speaking to the Spirit of God imparting its gifts to the Corinthians) says: "Dividing to each one as he wills." [Marginal note: Paulus] And if it is contended that good by nature tends towards communicating good: here, ascending higher than philosophy inquires, we will say: That highest good always diffuses itself into its offspring, and co-eternal spirit: in which offspring it continuously produces those eternal exemplars, that measure which is always present, and the whole possession at once. Nor was He inactive in idleness before the generation of the world, who, as the Son testifies, always works a work which no one knows, just as no one knows the worker, except the Son: and to whom the Son wishes to reveal it. These things were not revealed to Aristotle, nor to Averroes, nor to those who are content with only an Aristotelian or Ciceronian torch. Nor was He inactive (to speak with you) who was most happy in Himself, nor for Himself, who needs no external thing, did He build this worldly house with such ornament: but for man, the chief, not foolish or wicked, but just and wise: or at least, that in the same house he might be instructed in wisdom and goodness: that he might be a worthy citizen of the super-mundane palace. This play He had with the orb of lands, and with the sons of men: Which Cicero or Aristotle did not know: Because as Trismegistus says: God (whom they name nature) by mixing Himself with man, brought forth a miracle, which surpasses the reason of all miracles. [Marginal note: Triſme.] In whom, beholding His own image, He smiled upon him with immense love: and congratulating Himself as if on a son, He granted all his works for his own use: that he might bring all things back to Himself through him, with whom He was mixed, but him first of all: provided that, purified and recognizing his divine origin, he might be made worthy of God: But to this, the greatest impediment is brought by the delight in corporeal things, and the erroneous love of inferior things: By which hindered minds recognize neither themselves, nor even God, whose image they bear. Nor did He need instruments, who accomplishes all things by mere command. Nor did that Archetype, existing as the giver of all forms (as that thrice-greatest one teaches), and most full of all fruitfulness, need assistance to produce forms.

--- Page 168 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

Nor is it strange if the elements obeyed him, which were cast forth by his sole command. Nor did he dwell in a hovel, but in the most spacious dwelling of that immense sphere, whose center is everywhere: There he resided through those eternal ages, which neither you nor any mind apart from him can comprehend. Therefore, it is no wonder if you and other mortals struggle in conceiving those things which lie hidden in the archive of the supreme architect, revealed to very few. And to turn myself to Alcinous, there is nothing outside the world into which it might be resolved, nor do we say it itself is to be resolved: granted that it had a beginning of its duration. And if it is resolved, it requires nothing beforehand into which it might be dissolved, just as it did not seek anything beforehand from which it might be made: since its creation or dissolution is independent of the laws of natural generation and dissolution. Nor did he await co-workers, [Marginal note: Avicenna] O Avicenna, who accomplishes all things by his own power and good pleasure, as we shall presently declare. And not by nature or necessity, as those believe to whom the eternal power of God and the love by which he created the world is hidden.

Why the Philosophers erred from Catholic truth. Chapter XIII.

[Illuminated initial H containing a figure of a man at a desk] These and similar forces and machines the philosophers directed in vain against the walls of supernal truth, Whose teaching is not usurped by human pride, but diffused by the clarity of divine power: which mocks those who are wise in their own eyes and despise others, leaving them in the darkness of their obscured arrogance, but those whom it illuminates, it leads to contemplate the inner sanctuaries of God and nature with clear light. And so that I may expose, even in part, the madness of those who arrogate to themselves the name of wisdom, I would like to ask them this one thing: how they recognize the blessed God. They will certainly respond: "From motion and these sensible things, by which we are led to those things which can be known by us, because all our knowledge has its origin from sense; and the test of true statements is (says [Marginal note: Averroes] Averroes) that they agree with sensible things." And that is more known in which more senses agree. These are their most common doctrines: but let them say, I ask. Do these sensible things have a univocal or an equivocal proportion with the supreme God? Not indeed univocal, if we follow their teachings, by which they teach that God and created things do not agree in any [Marginal note: Porphy. Aristo.] univocal concept of substance or being. Hence Porphyry, pursuing their doctrine, says: "If anyone calls all beings, he will name them equivocally (says Aristotle, of course)." Whom many more recent (philosophers) follow, although some, holding a univocal concept of God and creature, substance and accident, try to interpret Aristotle's mind to their own purpose, perhaps fearing to contradict such a highly esteemed man without necessity. But if they are equivocal, it is no wonder if by proceeding through these lower things they err in the knowledge of God. For what can they [Marginal note: Aristote. Averroes] imagine about God through their motion or these sensible things, who is entirely alien from senses and motion? For he is entirely removed (says Aristotle with his Averroes in the discourse on the heavens) from the modes of creatures. Hence, that he is the first mover, who is not moved, they only know, all other knowledge about him through creatures being excluded: since him

--- Page 169 ---
they remove [Him] from the modes of creatures. Therefore, it is not surprising if they try to take away many things, as if closed off to themselves, from the supreme Creator. Namely, that He created the world, that He fashioned it with free generosity, and that He established it when He willed. What He produces according to nature, or out of His innate benevolence: How He foresees all things, even the smallest, what He requires from His creations, why He constructed this machine, how He conducted Himself in its making. And it is indeed strange, that while on the one hand they completely remove God from the modes of creatures, on the other hand, through those things they observe in these lower realms, they wish to restrict God's omnipotence and virtue.

Let them hear, I ask, what the great Dionysius, first imbued with their [Marginal note: Diony.] discipline, and afterwards illuminated by the rays of divine power, says about Him. God (he says) is all things eminently. For whatever good we observe in these domestic things, let us dedicate it to the sublime God, in the most excellent way we can: because all things that are beautiful in a work of art ought to flourish more beautifully in the Artist. And whatever is commended in mediocre things, and in the lowest, it is fitting to be found in the best. For good is always better in the better. Wisdom is good in a Citizen, better in a Praetor, best in a Prince. Power is good in a Soldier, better in a leader, best in a King. Let the same be held for clemency, liberality, and other virtues and adornments. But since fecundity, power, vigor, piety, beauty, munificence, and other things of that kind shine in lower things: they ought to vibrate with supreme splendor in that divine mind. For in this worldly populace, all these things paint the soul like adventitious colors: but in the super-worldly Prince, they gleam with the rays of His infinite essence (which unites all things attributed and dedicated to Him).

These people admit God is the first and best of all, but that other things are inferior and ministering to Him. And if they commend fecundity, liberty, generation, and similar things in this manner: why do they deny them to the best God, who says to His own household: "If I grant generation to others, shall I be barren?" They will perhaps say: We remove from God not only what savors of imperfection, [Marginal note: Iſaias] but everything that falls short of perfection. Hence we take away external fecundity from Him: lest anything new, or any change, be ascribed to that eternal and immutable being. We also remove the liberty of contingency from Him: lest He seem to act as if imperfect, hoping for retribution: nor do we deny the liberty by which He acts, according to what is fitting for Him. These are indeed subtle arguments, yet they do not restrict. Do not, O wise ones, all schools teach: that these lower things strive to hold the image of God to the best of their ability? This the Platonists everywhere, this the Catholics with great [Marginal note: Platoni. Cathol. Ariſto.] consonance echo. But even the Peripatetics agree on the same point: as their master says word for word in the second discourse on the Soul: "It is the most natural of operations for living beings: that whatever are perfect, and not deprived, or have spontaneous generation, to make another like itself." An animal indeed, an animal: a plant truly, a plant: so that they may participate in that divine and immortal being, as far as they can: For all things desire that, and for its sake they do all things whatsoever they do according to nature: and they cannot imitate it continuously, nor with perpetual reason for it,

--- Page 170 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

As for the fact that nothing corruptible manages to remain identical and numerically one, but rather each thing participates and communicates [in this permanence] to the extent it can, some more, some less: thus far, Aristotle. The gist of whose words is: that each member of this earthly body, the more perfect it is, the more it strives to emulate the maker. [Marginal note: Averroes] What faithless Arab interprets this concerning heaven? For how, according to the faithless one, is heaven that eternal thing which all things emulate, when this eternal thing is that for whose sake the elements, and heaven itself, and all things act?

[Marginal note: Aristotle] Do not Aristotle's dogmas everywhere resound, that God is the end of all things, for whose sake, as beloved and desired, all things are moved? But these are the least among many things which the faithless dog, barking against the truth, distorts and destroys the master's meanings: in which the name of destroyer rather than commentator could be ascribed to him. Nor should anyone wonder if I rage against this slanderer, because the zeal of the living God burns me: for this wretch dares to blaspheme, and makes very many others (alas, to be lamented) blaspheme.

Listen, I beg you, what this dog barks there about the best God. Divine solicitude, he says, since it could not make this remain as an individual, took pity by giving the power so that they could remain in species. Be silent, faithless dog, nor presume to speak of God, you fugitive from light. With what audacity do you dare to measure the power of the Almighty? Why could He not give permanence to man and other inferior things, which He gave to Saturn, and all the Planets, and stars, as you assert? How did He become impotent in inferior things, who was so powerful in the highest things? What dignity of the Most High God, who, when He could not provide one benefit to His inferiors, took care to provide another. But if you attribute this solicitude to heaven, I truly wonder, while you ascribe the providence and work of the highest Prince to ministers. And if the heavens could not do this, why could the highest Prince not do it?

But returning to where we digressed, these people confess that all things are divine and emulate perfection: elements in being, plants in life and fecundity, animals in a better life, and in whatever their condition. Man, however, who rejoices in the peculiar gift of liberty, in the same way emulates God. Hence also liberty is proven in God, because He contains all things which He bestows upon others. Nor does the highest perfection fail in lower degrees; nor is its simplicity destroyed in many things, by which it contains all things with infinite power. Nor indeed does the intellectual soul degenerate, if it exercises the power of sensing, vegetating, and moving according to place, according to their dogmas.

For God senses (that we may ascend to higher things) with His own senses, which the sacred scriptures attribute to Him. He moves all other things, remaining stable, gives life, and is nourished by His own food of wisdom. But all these things in their manner, and perfection, and power, lie hidden from human intellects, unless they are illuminated by His light.

For liberty is not an election according to nature (as some think), nor indifferent to good or evil, but to good according to its own free will. In man, however, the most perfect of living beings, this liberty has somewhat degenerated, so that it can even be carried towards evil; but in this it least emulates God. But in a better way, perhaps above all things, it bears His image. And it is in God Himself

--- Page 171 ---
TONUS PRIMUS. 17

fertility without labor, as Mercury says: God, endowed with the fertility of both sexes,
is the source of all sexes and fertilities. And since He does not grow sluggish with idleness,
He always produces inwardly, but outwardly according to the pleasure of His will: Since this
is the first principle of contingent things, neither do we have the ability, nor is it right, to seek the cause of this
first principle itself: to which, when we arrive, Aristotle himself commands us to rest. [Marginal note: Aristo]
Nor does He need any prior disposition or approximation, nor does He fear resistance,
nor is He hindered by space, He who makes all things by commanding. But these inferior
causes and instruments require a prior disposition of the subject fabricated by God Himself:
and they pre-require application: they await the succession of time:
and they need such aids, which are sought in the agent for a determined virtue.
Therefore, those reasoning from such conditioned workers to
Him who is most absolute from all these things, fall into various errors. But if,
from those things which they observe in this fabric, they strive to arrive at the knowledge of the Archetype,
let them attribute all these things to Him with their fitting and most perfect characteristic.
And let them remove whatever denotes weakness in the operator: and then they will see that the
highest things of the archetype correspond with the lower and middle things with the sweetest sound and
harmony, which we have proposed. For neither do the singers, sub-singers, and counter-singers enter
the harmony with the same key, although they agree in the same consonance.
So also the three worlds, which we claim to be in harmony, proceeding with different
notes, produce the same harmony: For all things are in the Maker, as it were,
in a certain likeness: which are contemplated in these lower things as in an image or a trace:
But the image falls short, and much more so the trace, from that which it
represents. Nevertheless, from these things, through analogy and a certain symbol, we arrive
at the knowledge of the Maker: Which agree neither by a different reason as equivocal terms, nor
exactly the same as univocal terms: but by a certain similitude, representing
that most perfect characteristic of higher things, each according to its degree, with its own
somewhat inferior and less refined quality.

Reasons for the world's newness. Chapter XIV.

**Q**uam weak the philosophers' contrivances against the world's creation
and newness have been, we have already seen: it remains for us, fighting from the opposite side,
girded for battle, to hurl their javelins back at them,
taking up, where necessary, the sword of the divine word. Among other weapons which
the philosophers directed, was the incongruity of newness with an eternal God, not
perceiving whence newness could have come. And (as Censorinus says) whether eggs or birds [Marginal note: Censo.. Q . M. tellum.]
were generated first: since neither an egg without a bird, nor a bird without an egg, can be
produced. Hence they considered this world to be eternal, and they judged the beginning
and end of every generated thing to be the same through its perpetual revolution. But from you, O Physi- [Marginal note: Auerro]
cists, I ask, whence this newness which we continually see? The Arab says: that this
proceeds from new revolutions, which nevertheless are ancient from eternal succession,
and there is a state where antiquity and newness are preserved. Hence some have said—
C

--- Page 172 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

But, the heaven is partly new, partly old. But since these revolutions are made by presiding intelligences, there will be no rest in the heavens. I ask from where those move anew, which are called ministers of the maker, or of the first mover, as you say? Therefore, they move anew, so that they may unfold those things which the first mover commands to be made anew: who, remaining stable, causes all things to be moved. Therefore, the principle of this newness is not from the heavens, nor from an intelligence, but from the first mover: who commands these things to be renewed according to his will, and by a certain hidden order within himself, compelled by no necessity, lest it seem to have a conne- [Marginal note: Aristote.]
-xion with inferior things: in which Aristotle agrees, while he asserts himself happy without any external good. Nor would there be any contingency, if necessarily it went forth into action: Which contingency Aristotle proves in things from the fact that it would not be expedient to deliberate, or to negotiate, unless the events were contingent. But this contingency is not already generated in reality, because then it is necessary. Hence [Marginal note: Id

--- Page 173 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 18

then? If the first, therefore there will be some things more than infinite. The Arab says: This is not inconvenient in successive things, just as it is not in numbers: where infinite decades would yield just as much from that infinite repetition as infinite hundreds: Nor would a number added to these make a greater increase than to those. O good God, who, I ask, can listen to such things with impartial ears? From a hypothesis imagined as impossible in numbers, but never truly held, he wishes to solve those inconveniences which follow from the revolutions, which he asserts to have preceded infinitely. But lest there be contention about successive things and numbers, let these supporters of the world honestly say: Do the revolving Intelligences know these revolutions or not? If they do not know: indeed a great calumny is inflicted upon them, by supposing them to be ignorant of their own motions, which many Astronomers know: But if they know all, and infinite ones: how can they apprehend infinite things with a determined intellect? But if you say: They know part of those revolutions, and part they do not: Which will be, which

[Marginal notes: Auerroi; Astron.]

--- Page 174 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

how does it direct what it does not understand? How does it render fitting rewards for deeds done well or badly (as is asserted there) which does not examine individual operations? And in the *Meteorologica* they teach that God placed pure fire beneath the sphere of the Moon. How did it arrange and order that which it neither made nor knows? Indeed, it would be tedious to bring forward all things which, destroyed by manifest contradiction, collapse of their own accord. But from many things, I have brought forward these few: so that the Peripatetics and Averroists may understand that not all of their dogmas are unshaken and solid. But in order that we may pursue our purpose, I
[Marginal note: Augu. / Macro.]
consider worthy of greater weight the judgment of Augustine, Macrobius, and many wise men, who do not believe the eternity of the world can stand with such a meager memory of past events, and with the invention of many arts and things celebrated by Eu-
[Marginal note: Eusebio / Pamphi. / Cle. Ale. / Beroso / Chald. / Aristo. / Auerroi: / Theo. / Epigene / Critio. / Phil. / Suph. / Egesia. / Archi. / Damast. / Aulus / Gellius / Plinius / Pphilo. / Diuersa- / rum rerū / inuento- / res / Moses / Berosus]
sebius Pamphilus, Clement of Alexandria, Berosus the Chaldean, Aristotle, Averroes, Theophrastus, Epigenes, Critodemus, Philostephanus, Suphanus, Egesias, Archimachus, Damasthenes, Aulus Gellius, and very many others of diverse languages, but most extensively by Pliny in his *Natural History*, where he confesses to having collected many things from the aforementioned authors. To these is favored the authority of the sacred scriptures, which declare the inventors of various things: although it differs concerning the inventors, just as the aforementioned authors among themselves: which happens either due to the variety of languages, or because these historians, especially the Greeks, wished to claim for themselves what was not theirs. If therefore from the beginning, indeed before the beginning, the world existed (as the Philosophers assert) why through a series of innumerable ages was the culture we now use not invented? Not the use of letters, by which alone memory is made eternal: Not the experience of many things. Noah handed down the cultivation of the vine, as Moses narrates: who was Janus, if we believe Berosus: but Bacchus, if it pleases to borrow something from poetic fictions: through whom true poets understood the solar virtue with which wine is filled. But when Rome was already growing, the Gauls learned the cultivation of wine. Indeed, Ceres taught the cultivation and use of grains. The Greeks received letters from Cadmus a little before the destruction of Troy. The Egyptians (who are called Mizraim
[Marginal note: Clemen. / Alexan.]
in Hebrew) from Mizraim, son of Ham, grandson of great Noah (with Clement of Alexandria as witness) obtained medicine: which Apollo and Aesculapius expanded: Hippocrates of Cos organized it: Galen of Pergamum extended it: Avicenna, an Arab or Persian, as others say, augmented it. Herbal medicines (were taught by) Chiron, son of Saturn and Philyra. Some hand down Pythagoras as the author of music: A-
[Marg

--- Page 175 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 19

Nimrod: as the sacred scriptures relate. The Egyptians likewise [invented] lamps and textiles: The Lydians [invented] dyeing wool: Closter, son of Arachne, [invented] the spindle in wool-making: Arachne [invented] linen and nets: Nicias of Megara [invented] the fuller's art: Aristo[teles] [Marginal note: Aristo.] [invented] smelting and tempering bronze: The Scythians [invented] Lydian [metalworking]. Theophrastus [Marginal note: Theop] thinks Delam is Phrygian. Some [attribute] bronze working to the Chalybes, others to the Cyclopes: Iron in Crete, those who were called Idæan Dactyls. But the sacred scriptures [attribute it to] Tubal-cain, who was a hammerer and smith in all works of bronze and iron for many years before the flood. Erichthonius [invented] silver, as others [attribute it to] Ceacus: Gold mines and smelting: Cadmus the Phoenician at Mount Pangaeus, as others [attribute it to] Thoas and Eadis in Panchaia, or Sol, son of Ocean. Midacritus first brought lead from the island of Cassiterides. Daedalus [invented] the working of materials, and in it the saw, axe, plummet, drill, glue, lithocolla, square, and pincers, and level, and lathe, and key. Theodorus of Samos [invented] measures and weights, [or] Phidon of Argos, or Palamedes, as Gellius [Marginal note: Au. gel] preferred. Pyrodes, son of Silex, [invented] fire from flint: The Phoenicians [invented] trade: Eumolpus the Athenian [invented] the cultivation of trees: Biges the Athenian [invented] the ox and the plow, as others [attribute it to] Triptolemus. Midus the Messenian [invented] the breastplate: The Lacedaemonians [invented] the helmet, sword, spear: The Carians [invented] greaves and crests: Scythes, son of Jupiter, [invented] the bow and arrow; others maintain that Perses, son of Perseus, invented arrows. The Aetolians [invented] lances: They say Aetolus, son of Mars, invented the javelin with a thong. The Tyrrhenians [invented] light spears and the pilum: Penthesilea the Amazon [invented] the axe: Piseus [invented] hunting spears: And among siege engines, the Cretan [invented] the scorpion. The Syrian Phoenicians [invented] the catapult: Aeneas [invented] the ballista and the sling: Piseus the Tyrrhenian [invented] the trumpet: Artemon of Clazomenae [invented] the testudo (siege shield): Epeus at Troy [invented] the horse, which is now called a ram, among mural machines: Bellerophon [invented] riding a horse: Pletronius [invented] bridles and horse coverings: The Thessalians, who were called Centaurs, [invented] fighting from horseback. The Phrygian nation first yoked two-horse chariots: Erichthonius [invented] four-horse chariots: Palamedes [invented] army order, signaling, passwords, watches in the Trojan war: Sinon [invented] signal mirrors in the same war: Lyacon [invented] truces: Theseus [invented] treaties: Aeolus, son of Helenus, [invented] the understanding of winds: Damasthenes [Marginal note: Dama.] testifies that the Erythraeans made the bireme: Thucydides [Marginal note: Thucy. Author.] [attributes] triremes to Aminocles the Corinthian. Aristotle [attributes] the quadrireme to the Carthaginians, whom others call Charchedonians [Marginal note: Charchedonios], whose architect was Vosporus. Nesigiton the Salaminian built quinqueremes: Zenagoras the Syracusan [built] six-oared ships: But Alexander [built ships] up to twelve [oars], Ptolemy Soter up to fifteen, Ptolemy Philadelphus up to thirty, Ptolemy Philopator, who was surnamed Tryphon, up to forty [oars]. Hippius the Tyrian invented the cargo ship, the Cyrenians [invented] the lembum (light boat), the Phoenicians [invented] the cymba (small boat), the Rhodians [invented] the celox (swift yacht), the Phoenicians [invented] the observation of stars in navigation, the Copaeans [invented] the oar, Icarus [invented] sails, Daedalus [invented] the mast and yardarm: The Salaminians [invented] the hippagium (horse transport ship), the Tyrrhenians [invented] the anchor, Typhis [invented] steering aids. I omit the inventors of innumerable other things whom the authors cited above describe: And I will speak to you: who assert that the world is eternal: What were those [people] in the world doing before these very brief times, to which the inventors of things are assigned?
C iij

--- Page 176 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

...What were those inhabitants of the world doing before these very brief times, to which the inventors of things are assigned—those without Ceres and Bacchus, without cultivation of the land, whom neither trade, nor literary studies, nor disciplines, nor military service, nor navigation, nor the art of building, nor weaving, nor sewing, nor the loom, nor wool-working engaged? What did they eat? Where did they live? What did they wear? What were they doing, utterly ignorant of the arts? For it is indeed ridiculous that those who assert the world is eternal should describe inventors of arts and human sustenance, since these things cannot stand together at the same time.

**Why God did not create the world before, or after, the time Moses recounts. Chapter XV.**

[Large decorative woodcut initial 'H' containing a seated figure] Here, an imagination drawn from senses and familiar things offends very many, not only common people but also wise ones. "What (they ask) was God doing before he created the world? Why did he wait until then? And why did he not delay for a while longer?" These, and similar questions, entangle those who do not separate God's condition from our own. Augustine responds with a wise joke to the common people: when they ask, what was God doing...

--- Page 177 ---
                      TONVS PRIMVS.                      20

or after He made the world. Therefore, let it be shameful to ask why God did not
create before and after, as if 'before' and 'after' existed without the world's temporal
succession; unless perhaps (as some say) it was imagined before. Nor indeed was it
necessary or fitting for God to have created the world in that 'before' which you now
imagine. How excellently, therefore, Timæus Locrus judges that such words as 'was',  Timæus
'will be', 'before', and 'after', which are conditions of time, are imprudently transferred
to the divine substance. Let these curious people please hear Democritus' not-unfitting  Democri.
joke: "No one looks at what is before their feet, yet they scrutinize the secrets of the
heavens and probe the mysteries of God." Hence also the Wise Man: "We find it  Salomo.
difficult (he says) to know what is on earth, and what is in sight we discover with
labor: But what is in the heavens, who will investigate? And who could know the mind
of God, unless He himself gives wisdom and sends His spirit from the highest heavens?"
For He indeed sent at times, speaking in many and various ways to the fathers through
the prophets, but most recently He has spoken to us through the Son, who made known
all those things which He heard from the Father to those disciples whom He had chosen:
Who, together with the prophets, knew much more about the mysteries of God and
nature than they revealed through the scriptures, mindful of that prophetic saying: "I
have hidden your words in my heart, that I might not sin against you." For they spoke
the wisdom of God among the perfect: And if they committed it to writing, they
nevertheless wrote it with this law, that no one should understand the enclosed
mysteries, unless they are led by the same divine power with which they themselves
were imbued.
    Philosophers fail, while they strive to prove that God acts necessarily
        externally.                                           Cap. XVI.

[Large decorative initial E] Having concluded the discussion on the world's creation, another battle remains for us to settle with the Philosophers, before we enter into the innermost secrets of God and nature: Namely, whether God is led to action by a certain necessity, or by a free and contingent choice. Philosophers were of the opinion that the condition of necessity was better than that of contingency, and for this reason they attributed it to God: To which reasons seem to assent, especially this, because He acts through His own substance and not through a borrowed power: Also because the effects of the world seem necessary, which in no way seem to proceed from a contingent cause: Also the seemingly invariable and necessary order of things, lest the universe be confused or disturbed. Nor could they deem it consistent that the divine intellect should act necessarily, and the will freely, since that divine mind and will is no less perfect than the intellect. We too could direct some arrows from the quiver of rational discourse at the philosophers, but since a matter of this kind pertains to God, we believe, with Plato, that it is not to be investigated by reason, but learned from oracles. The great lawgiver thunders: "God said, and it was done,"  Moſes.
with whom also his successor David: "He spoke, and they were made." But what  Dauid
seems to disturb those wise men is absolutely nothing. They presuppose a necessary
disposition to be more perfect than a contingent one, which they left to their successors
to prove. Do we not rather commend a Prince who directs all things according to his
will, than if he were to direct the work by nature or by any other impulse or stimulus?
                                                         C iiij

--- Page 178 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Who would condemn freedom, which (as it is commonly said) is not sold cheaply for all gold? Which wise men consider to be a special good granted to men. What perfection, I ask, what praise would there be in exalted minds, if they were always compelled to one side? What dignity would there be in a Prince, if he did all things by nature, and nothing by a generous spirit? Since by common consent we acknowledge God as the Prince of the world: What glory concerning governance, wisdom, justice, or clemency could be ascribed to Him, if for all things entrusted to Him, He were led by inevitable necessity? What thanks, or what worship, would we owe Him? Why, O Aristotle (as you say), is sacrificing innate to nature? Why are we bound, Averroes (as you teach), to magnify God the Creator with prayers and sacrifices? If God acts necessarily, to what end are sacrifices? To what end are prayers? Ad quid diuinus cultus? [Marginal note: Plato] Cur orare nobis proprium eſt (ut Plato, Porphyrius, Iamblicus, & Proculus docent) [Marginal note: Porphy.] ſi Deus orationibus non flectitur? Ad quid Pythagoras & Socrates, oraculi teſtimonio, [Marginal note: Iab. Pro.] omnium ſapientiſſimi orabant? Ad quid totum genus humanum omni tempore, [Marginal note: Pyt. So.] omni loco, omnique natione diuinis præcibus deditum fuit? Hence it is concluded that prayers are proper to the human race, to which, since prayers are innate by nature (as they teach), God is swayed by them: and He does not always act necessarily. Nor because He acts according to

--- Page 179 ---
TONVS PRIMVS. 21

He refutes the diminishing of the sun's variation exhibited at the Messiah's death, with these words: "I know not by what spirit inspired, Apolophanes, you burst forth into divination, when, looking with me at the eclipse against the order of nature, at the time of Christ's suffering, you turned to me and said: 'These, O excellent Dionysius, are the vicissitudes of divine things.' If you can, argue against that. Indeed, I was present with you, and together I saw, I judged all things, and pursued them with worthy admiration."
And if you do not believe this most upright philosopher, hear what Astronomers say. Aesculus, most skilled in that field, then by astronomical calculation determines the Sun to be in Aries and the Moon in Libra, when the Sun suffered an eclipse during a full moon: at which time the Jews customarily celebrated their Passover. Furthermore, Phlegon, an excellent calculator of Olympiads [Marginal note: Phleg.], in book 13, reports that in the fourth year of the 202nd Olympiad there was a great eclipse of the sun, greater than all that had been before: at which time Christ suffered. Plato by no means kept silent about the retrogradation of the sun and simultaneously the flood of waters, as these were most well-known to the whole world. [Marginal note: Plato] Let the monuments of the Persians and Chaldeans [Marginal note: Persæ / Chaldæ] be read, where these most famous miracles are recorded. Hence also the Persian priests celebrate the memory of the triple Mithras, that is, of the sun: as Dionysius and Strabo [Marginal note: Diony. / Strabo] testify: For the Persians [Marginal note: Persæ] call the sun Mithros or Mithras: Who in the time of Hezekiah was seen to perform a triple course, or to fix three stations, both by its usual progress to the west, and by a new retreat for ten hours to the east, and again then tending to the west. I omit other witnesses: Philosophers, Gentiles, Chaldeans, Egyptians, Phoenicians, Greeks, Sibyls, and very many historians cited by Josephus [Marginal note: Ioseph. / Aristot.], Aristobulus, Tertullian [Marginal note: Tertul. / Eusebio], and Eusebius concerning these matters. And if the argument from authority is valid, let also the testimony of so many wise men be valid concerning a fact which Aristotle [Marginal note: Aristo.] denies in words. Avicenna [Marginal note: Auicen.] most prudently considers that motion to be neither necessary nor violent, but a middle ground between both, so that it is at the discretion of the ruler. Nevertheless, secondary causes are so bound to the primary cause that they operate only as much as the primary cause commands. But the same (as Augustine says) administers the things which it has created in such a way that it allows them to perform their own proper motions. Which, because it rarely happens, and because the order decreed from the primal institution persists in most cases and frequently, therefore Aristotle judges it to be natural and necessary. Natural (as he himself [Marginal note: Aristo.] teaches in *On Physical Hearing*) is that which happens in most cases, and frequently. Nor could he investigate further from sensible things. But the operations of God, and the connection of inferior things with the primary cause, are not to be investigated by rational discourse, but to be learned from oracles (as we have said). Hence, no progress from that necessity which is seen in effects to the necessity of the cause is proven, since the necessity of effects depends on the order of the primary cause. Nor indeed are they necessary, since all are particular: because the work of nature is not limited to the universal, but to the singular, which they themselves report to be more contingent than necessary. But because they contend for eternal species, and a necessary coherence of the subject to the predicate, in which the essential property, or quiddity (as they say) concerning the sub-
                                                                                                                              C v

--- Page 180 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

[If this is] rejected, it is said that another cause of necessity must be sought, which is (if I am not mistaken) a corres-
[Marginal note: Aristo. Plato. Syria.] pondence to those exemplars, or eternal ideas, ridiculed by Aristotle, immersed in his senses, celebrated by Plato and our wise men, bravely defended by Syrianus. I consider this correspondence supported by a better necessity than if that universal were to spring from many particulars (as they think); which (in my judgment) cannot stand, since that universal is a certain simple being, which neither
[Marginal note: Procul. Sapien.] intelligence nor nature (according to Proclus and many wise men) can produce; because the universal, or simple, is also the first of all created things before intelligence, or heaven, or any other particular, whatever it may be, was produced. And although Proclus's mode of production is criticized by some, they nevertheless agree in the conclusion. With this admitted, let them unravel their mode of arguing. Therefore, the effect follows (to return to where we digressed) the immutable determination and order of the supreme cause, unless that same cause has decreed otherwise. As for what they add, that God's will has equal perfection with the intellect, which acts necessarily, we admit, while it operates in its innermost parts in conformity with the intellect itself, but it unfolds external effects, which the intellect depicted from eternity in the Word, at will. Indeed, I wonder at those philosophers who confess God to be most simple and perfect, with all externals excluded, and immediately forgetting their own dogma, they think God has a necessary connection with inferior things, as if He could not exist or be blessed without them. How is He most simple, if He has a necessary connection with others? How is the prince of all (as they say) necessarily enslaved to the service of inferiors? What dignity, what condition is this for the supreme prince? Nor should they fear that the order of celestial things and the universe would be destroyed if the craftsman disposes and varies at will, since He knows how to reduce to order what He has made and ordered. Nor indeed is the destruction of the work to be feared when the craftsman applies his hand, by whose touch it is perfected rather than destroyed.

Progress for contingency in divine workmanship. Chapter XVII.

Up to this point, we have taken up the shield for the defense of truth and divine majesty; but now, beyond those things which divine oracles have taught, we will direct some arrows against the enemies of truth, who believe God acts necessarily. And if they are rather to be scorned than refuted—
[Marginal note: Procul.] those whom Proclus, following Plato's mind, places in the third class of impiety, and decrees that one should not deal with them when speaking of divine matters—nevertheless, so that they may be pierced by their own darts, we will run through some points. And I would like to ask them to explain whence monsters arise in nature. For they will say: Because matter was deficient or superfluous; or qualities do not correspond in due proportion; or because of the container's fault; and things of this kind, which are subdivided into various members. But if these causes act necessarily, why do they not prepare everything properly, since nature (as they say) does not fail in necessary things? How then do they act necessarily, if they fail? "You wish to infer," they will say, "that natural causes operate contingently." And if they were to say: What would follow? Nevertheless,

--- Page 181 ---
**TONVS PRIMVS.** **22**

to remove superfluous argumentation, let them remember what is common in schools: that necessity has a twofold manner of existing: one indeed absolute, the other truly conditional. The former (unless the truth of the sacred scriptures deceives me) must be attributed to God alone, the Blessed. The latter, however, to inferior things, so that they are necessary by the order given by the Creator. But because perhaps the philosophers would deny this, let us come to the work of these causes. For if they err and produce monsters, that is because the order decreed for them by nature (as they say) or by the supreme Creator is deficient: as is the truth. And if they deviate from the order, that [order] was not simply necessary, but given by the first cause, to which other [causes] are subordinated and act in its virtue: from which if the first withdraws itself, not only do they fail, but they accomplish nothing. And if some things seem to lead necessarily, that proceeds from the law given to them, as he full of God sings: *You have set a boundary, which they shall not pass.* [Marginal note: David] Nor is he bound by the law, who imposes law on others. But they will say: Therefore, knowledge will be about things that can be otherwise: the opposite of which Aristotle teaches? To whom we will say: If your Aristotle understands those things which are known to be necessary [Marginal note: Aristo] by the order of the universe, thus it will be about things impossible to be otherwise. But if he understands things absolutely necessary, let him remember what he taught at the end of the book *On Physical Hearing*: that it is not enough for the wise man to state something, unless he assigns a reason for what is stated. Nor let them adduce experience: because from that it will be easily concluded that that necessity proceeds from order, which failing, those things fail: Therefore they are not simply necessary. If they say: therefore they can be otherwise: What is that to me? Let them solve it themselves: For fire can not burn, as was actually the case: And any effect can be removed from the cause that produced it, while the inherence (as we said) of the predicate to the subject, about which their knowledge exists, remains. But having progressed further, I would like to learn from the Peripatetics: Whence do those things necessarily inhere? They will say: They have it from nature, as we prove by experience. But what is this nature of theirs? Nothing certainly, unless the author of the universe, who is true unerring intelligence, since (as they teach) the work of nature is the work of unerring intelligence: By whose order all things succeed: because all things serve Him, says the Prophet. [Marginal note: David] Nor let them say, What concern are the Prophets to us, since we do not consider anything to be known, unless it is proven by demonstration? But where, I ask, does demonstration have its origin? Is it not from principles, to which, once the terms are known, we assent, or which we prove by experience? But if we believe demonstrated things through principles and experienced things, therefore other things are known more than demonstrated things. O execrable vice, which has grown among our people, who bear the Christian name, that they do not admit as certain, unless it is proven by demonstration: which Aristotle [Marginal note: Aristo.] painted, but uses minimally in his natural progress, where he always proceeds from presuppositions made by him: so that what they believe to be demonstration, is a deduction by way of authority, or from things pre-accepted by him. If they are Catholics, let them believe the sacred pages more than Aristotle: If they are Academics, let them know that many things, especially divine ones, are known through illuminating rays, or through the agreement of what is said with an intellect inclined to truth. If they are Peripatetics, let them hear their Aristotle, that other things than demonstra-

--- Page 182 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

...that things can be known with certainty: From where does he get that to know is to understand by demonstration? Is it not from Aristotle, speaking thus? And we have our doctrines from the [Marginal note: Prophets.] Prophets, taught by divine oracle: who prove what they teach by wonders and the peril of their lives. And if we were to say that to know is certain knowledge about anything whatsoever, would we sin against the Holy Spirit, or against Aristotle? Not against the Holy Spirit, certainly, and I care little for Aristotle: because he is neither my lord, nor shall I come to his tribunal to be judged if I do not adhere to him. But they will call me rash or ignorant: because I dare to depart from Aristotelian institutions, which so many brilliant minds follow. Hence pain, hence tears (alas, a horrible deed) after they fear more to deny Aristotle than Paul, in whose breast Christ resonates: indeed, Christ himself, who is the wisdom and truth of God, who will judge all, especially those who in name follow Him, but in doctrine and life follow Aristotle, whom the Greeks call a cacodaemon, or the insane and impious Averroes. We consider it a small thing (to speak with John Scotus) to deny Aristotle in those matters which [Marginal note: John Scotus.] are against the doctrine of truth that we defend: And although he was most sagacious, and a diligent reader of other doctrines, and a careful collector, yet he was a cunning accuser of the ancients: whose poorly presented opinions he by no means refutes, proceeding rather (as [Marginal note: Simplicius.] Simplicius, his auditor, says) against words than meanings, and obscuring many things: so that he alone might seem wise. What wonder then if he is most justly criticized, who unjustly accused so many distinguished men? Parmenides, Melissus, Democritus, Pythagoras, and his divine teacher Plato: Whose doctrine (not only in my judgment but in that of many wise men) so far exceeds the Aristotelian, [Marginal note: Plato] as much as divine things, with which Plato always breathes, together with Pythagoras, are superior to earthly things, [Marginal note: Aristotle. Proclus.] by which Aristotle is weighed down: Who (as Proclus, professor of Academic and Peripatetic dogma, says) together with Theophrastus and other Peripatetics, extended the light of their speculation even to the forms moving the universe. [Marginal note: Plato.] Plato, however, takes his beginnings from that which has dignity among beings, far removed, and indeed more worthy: whence also his progress is more sublime. Aristotle also accuses countless others, whose sayings, if pondered, will perhaps not be judged worthy of censure: for from these very men he learned all that he wrote. Nor does he claim for himself, compelled by truth, anything but refutations (elenchi). The rest, however, receiving from the ancients, he weaves into his syllogistic processes: so that he delivered an artificial art and a debased method of proceeding, rather than science: as he himself tacitly admits, where he treats of the Posterior Analytics, teaching that science is by demonstration, and this by quiddities (as they say) and the proper differences of things hidden from us: From which the principles of demonstration are shown to be unknown, and that no, or very little, demonstration can be had from them. Moreover, he condemns circular demonstration, and yet teaches that demonstration is made from those things which are "of every per se" and "according to that which is itself," to speak in his manner: Which propositions are convertible and infer each other. They will say, "There is no circularity in demon-"

--- Page 183 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 23

demonstration from causes. But let them note that a little above he had said that circular demonstration is sometimes found. But these things being omitted, since he teaches nothing in his doctrines that he has not received from the ancients: why should he be believed more than the ancients, who taught before him?

They will say: We accept what has been weighed in the Aristotelian balance. And would that it were not corrupted to the detriment of Christian religion and truth! Yet some insolent individuals, new to doctrine, dare to say with most impudent mouths: I do not cite Genesis, Jeremiah, or Isaiah to you; but I bring forth Aristotle: as if Moses and the prophets were not wise and learned in letters: although he [Moses] was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians: afterwards, by God's oracle, he was led to contemplate the innermost secrets of God himself and of nature: which neither Aristotle nor his most zealous followers ever considered.

And the Prophets, inspired by divine light [Marginal note: Prophets], which those who shun the light and are darkened cannot see, not only prophesied: but also handed down many things from the innermost storehouses of God and of lower things (though under their own enigmas).

Some more modest people say: We honor the prophets and holy men in divine matters: but in natural things, this [Aristotle] is the rule we must follow.

But I truly wonder how they could have known divine and supreme things: and yet the lower things, through which one arrives at the supreme, were closed off to them.

And since God is a mirror in which all things shine, how did they know Him without knowing the images that shine in Him?

Hence, they would not have thought that those [prophets] knew the archetype without knowing what is contained in it, if they had perceived the connection of the archetype with this mundane machine and the human world: of which each holds the likeness and image of the other: and from the knowledge of one, the other is easily recognized.

Hence, both by divine oracle and by many wise men—Mercury, Plato, Socrates, Zoroaster [Marginal notes: Mercury, Plato, Socrates, Zoroaster]—and by Aristotle himself [Marginal note: Aristotle], self-knowledge is commended in a wonderful way: because from it, a more perfect knowledge of God and of this machine [the universe] is more easily attained than Aristotle himself teaches.

Indeed, it was necessary for those prophets to contemplate divine and human things, and their correspondence: who spoke of divine matters through enigmas and veils of lower things, so that God's sacraments might be hidden from common and nocturnal eyes.

But if anyone reads the prophets with the veil removed, he will see that they explored the secrets of nature and God better than Aristotle.

Nor is the sun to be blamed if the eye does not see.

When (says Jerome) [Marginal note: Jerome] I was devoted to Cicero: if any prophet was taken into my hands, the language seemed uncultivated and rough: and I thought the defect was not of the light, but of the sun [i.e., the source, not the perception]. But being corrected, and with the veil removed, he saw in the prophets what he had not read before in gentile authors.

But let us return to the contingency of things.

Here Algazel [Marginal note: Algazel] argues more sharply, from the fact that the parts of this machine [the universe] are arranged in such a way that they could have been situated differently without any contradiction, hence they are contingent: and are arranged not by necessity, but by choice.

The Arab [Averroes] [Marginal note: Averroes] responds: We say that the parts of the world could not have been arranged differently: because the world is an animal.

From where did you faithlessly learn this kind of arguing from your Aristotle? For you want your authority to be for the principle of demon-

--- Page 184 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

demonstration. From where, moreover, this inference? Are you dreaming, or are you suffering from a frenzy? If the world is an animal: is it sensible or insensible? Deprived of sense, therefore not an animal: If it is sentient: does it see, hear, smell, taste, eat? If it eats: who, I ask, prepares food for it? From where does it obtain it for itself? In the world itself, or outside? If in the world: it eats itself: If outside the world: there is therefore another world. And it is doubtful, lest by eating each other, they destroy themselves. But setting aside jest in such a serious matter, if it is granted that it is an animal (as
[Marginal note: Plato] Plato, Aristotle, & many wise men seem to imply)
[Marginal note: Averroes] it is certainly not an animal contained under the genus of animals: because those things which are in that machine are divided by a prior division, before one arrives at 'animal'. But let it be said that it is called an animal according to a certain analogy & similitude: Why could its dispositions not have been ordered differently? From where does it contradict man, that he should have only one eye in his forehead, as is said of certain beings? Why could the upper jaw not have been made movable in other animals, and the lower fixed, as we observe in the crocodile? Why could other animals not have double knees, like the Camel? What contradiction would there be, if man had four arms, & only one ear? These things are so coordinated by the supreme moderator, that they could have been arranged differently without any contradiction, unless a specific condition of nature is presupposed: which the same creator himself established. But let us come to the world-animal. By what necessity is the sea, & land, arranged so that the ocean enters through the narrowest straits of Abila, & the high promontories of Calpe: which antiquity called the Pillars of Hercules? From where is it necessary: that from there it immediately spreads far and wide: which again extends into the Tuscan sea (which they call the Tyrrhenian): now it narrows into the Adriatic gulf: now it widens into the Syrian: now it flows around through the Aegean: which is called an archipelago from the beautiful multitude of intervening islands: and from there, constrained by the narrowest straits, it becomes the Hellespont: and the Propontis, where it expands: and where it is again pressed by the Thracian Bosphorus: when it again pours forth, the Pontus Euxinus, that is, the hospitable (the customs of the wild peoples having been softened) is formed: which was first called Axenus, that is, inhospitable, from the very cruel nature of its inhabitants: And again, when it mixes with the Maeotian swamp, it is named the Cimmerian Bosphorus? What also is the necessity, that the Nile, passing through the Ethiopians, & Arabs, arriving at Egypt, & the Tanais (Don River) running through both Scythias, & flowing into almost the middle of the Maeotian swamp, should distinguish the three principal parts of the world? What also is the necessity, that some part of the earth should be depressed into a valley: another should be spread out through plains: another should rise into hills, & higher mountains: and that rivers should flow with perpetual course, & torrents in their seasons? By what necessity are some clods of earth fertile, others sterile, some arid, & others marshy? Could we not imagine the entire circuit of the earth, without any contradiction, as flat, soft, and fruitful? And if God can do what we cannot think, as wiser men than Averroes affirm, why can He not do what we imagine? But if He is able to accomplish this: then things are not necessarily arranged in the way we perceive them.

--- Page 185 ---
**FIRST TONE. 24**
**That God knows particulars. Chapter XVIII.**

Now also other javelins must be hurled back against the natural philosophers, so that, fortified by the unshaken shield of truth, we may proceed to other matters. They were of the opinion that blessed God only looked upon higher and universal things, with particulars either being disregarded or entrusted to secondary causes, as if the divine intellect would disdain, or act more basely, if it were to behold such things. Not to see (says Aristotle) certain things is better and nobler than to see them. [Aristo.] The Arab, interpreting him, says: To be ignorant of base things is better than to know them. [Averroes] What (I ask) are those base things which it is better if they are not known than if they are known? Those things which do not exist, cannot be known. Those things which exist, are certainly good. If good, how are they base? And if you contend that some good things are also base, what, I ask, are those good base things? If you understand an Angel: why not heaven? And if heaven: why not man? And if man: why not the elements, where man lives? Why not horses, and oxen, and all things serving man, and certain known things that are part of man? Where shall we place the limits of His understanding? In heaven, or on earth, in the elements, in plants, or in living creatures? Where, I ask? And (to speak with Cicero) [Cicero] if God cares for heaven, and for the island which we call the globe of the earth, He will also care for its inhabitants, and for the parts of the island, Europe, Asia, and Africa, and their inhabitants: and that He may prefer the great (because no one is great unless inspired by divine will) and that He may sustain the small: For He made the small and the great (as that wise man says). [Wise man] Of these, and of the whole world, since they themselves confess Him to be the ruler: what will He do in His rule unless He exercises governance? And if He rules all things: how is it better that He should be ignorant even of the lowest things which He governs, than if He should know them? Who forced Him into ignorance of physical things, mathematical things, and other things, even if they are most minute? Who measured His capacity? [Aristo.] Aristotle, or Averroes? He commends the opinion of the Chaldean fathers, [Chaldeans] who with shrewd intellect investigated the knowledge of God: and yet he does not agree with them: that God understands all things. Nor does the intellect of a wise man become base (good sirs): if he knows the degrees, qualities, and even the most minute powers of herbs, juices, and stones. Nor if he knows the degrees of celestial bodies, minutes, seconds, thirds, and hundredths of minutes. Solomon is commended by the voice of all, to whom the surname "wise" [Salomon] (is given): because he discoursed from the cedar of Lebanon even to the hyssop that grows out of the wall: and who spoke of beasts, birds, creeping things, and fishes: Did his intellect and wisdom become base because of this? Did Aristotle and Theophrastus [Aristot. Theoph.] become base, who, imitating him, the one discoursed on the nature of animals, the other on the nature of plants? And if we wish to recall older figures: did not Hermes, greatest in wisdom, [Hermes] write of a singular harmony of certain stars, stones, and herbs? His grandfather Aesculapius (as some believe) [Aescula. Apollo] was held as a god together with Apollo: because they were the first, having learned the properties of herbs and roots, to apply their juices, leaves, and powders to heal human bodies. Who, I ask, are wiser, those ignorant of these things, or those who, because of their knowledge of these very things, (were held in such great honor...)

--- Page 186 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...knowledge of these things, claimed the name of wise men for themselves? But they will say: They were wise, not because they contemplated particulars, but because they contemplated the species of things and universal nature. And how did they investigate the species of things, unless by a pre-existing (as they teach), that is, particular experience? Nor could they know species without particulars: since the universal is nothing else (as they assert) but one out of many. How can this one be understood, unless the many are also understood: from which that one is extracted by them: or through ideal reasons, which they themselves do not sustain?

Nor if he understands all species, will it be contradictory. Therefore, he will be able to know animals, small fish, worms, ants, and plants. But why, I ask, will he be ignorant of man, the prelate of the world? How will he rule him as a prince, provide for his necessities, judge, unless he knows all his needs, and his deeds, both good and bad? The wisdom of God thunders forth, to which it is better to believe than to Aristotle or Averroes: [Marginal note: Christ David] "Your Father knows what you need." And His prophetic trumpet thunders: "My frame was not hidden from you, when I was made in the secret place: your eyes saw my unformed body, and in your book all of them will be written: so that they may receive worthy rewards for good or ill deeds."

They bring forward another argument: which they consider their strongest point. Namely, that that supreme mind cannot understand these lower things: lest, moved or perfected by them, it fall from its simplicity. Indeed, I wonder how they equate the knowledge of the Most High God [Marginal note: Aristotle.] with ours, when Aristotle says: that the intellect of God is simple, and perfect, and from itself. And thus, from itself, it understands all things that are in the world: [Marginal note: Averroes] Averroes, interpreting his words, posits a difference between God's knowledge and ours: because ours is caused by being: but that [God's knowledge] is of being. Nor does he wish to say openly: that it is the cause of being: as Catholics freely profess: yet compelled by truth, he cannot remain silent. For above he had said through obscure words, which I do not know whether the Barbarian uttered barbarically, or deliberately obscured: which he was unwillingly compelled to confess. Listen, I ask, to these monstrous words: "Truth," he says, "is: first, that it knows all things: second, that it knows itself only by knowledge in being, which is the cause of their being." And to pursue the Barbarian in his barbaric speech: If knowledge in being, in things, is the cause of those things which are: therefore, by understanding, it causes those things which are: And if it understands them: is not their understanding in its own intellect?

Why then do you, and your teacher, deride ideas: which are nothing other than the cognitions of things, and the exemplars of things to be made in that first intellect: which produces all things by knowing and commanding? Nor does it take knowledge from the produced object, or is it moved, or perfected, or does it beg to understand, or be excited: as our intellect does. Nor does that supreme intellect fail by contemplating so many particulars: Rather, that unique intellect of Averroes would fail by informing, or directing, or illuminating so many individuals. Oh, what foolishness and madness! Do you think the intellect you fabricate is stronger than God, who fabricated all things? Since God is moreover the end of all things: towards whom all things are directed, as towards the beloved and desired: by whom are all these things directed? "By nature," they will say. But what is this nature? By no one yet...

--- Page 187 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 25

I have ascertained what that nature is, about which they speak: whether it was made by God, or whether, like God's spouse, it produced the world together with Him; since they say, God and nature do nothing in vain, as if they together bring forth the offspring of this world. Nor can nature of this kind be matter or form, which do nothing, order nothing. Nor reasons, nor degrees of things, because they hint at something universal through this nature of theirs: that it acts together with God. But what that is, they have nowhere explained. Nevertheless, they profess that God acts together with it, and has disposed all things well; and elsewhere they assert that God does nothing except as an attracting end. And if the secondary causes, with which it co-acts, are this nature, who ordered them? Who established that they should cooperate together? Nature (they say) is the principle of motion and rest. But what is this principle of motion and state, unless an inclination inherent in those subjected to motion itself by some agent? And whether they wish or not, they must agree on one thing, from whom all motion and order proceeds, as they themselves teach. And if I did not fear exposing myself to the Peripatetics as a rash person to be torn apart, I would ask, what is this nature, to which they say universals are first known? What mutual process is there from nature to us, and vice versa? Who answers us in this game of balls? What again is this nature, which provides us with principles, through which we may know conclusions? Is it some general agent? Or something aggregated from natural things? Or their order? Is it something capable of reason, or an element, a stone, the sky, or something of this kind lacking sense? If it does not perceive, nor understand, how are principles known to it? But if it is intellectual, what is this nature? Is it us, or intelligences, or God Himself? If it is us, how will the same things be known to us beforehand, from which we may pre-receive knowledge? If intelligences are this nature, how are they outside natural and physical speculation (as they themselves teach) because they are not moved while they move? And why do they not say: these principles are known to separate or conjoined intelligences? But if God is this nature, why do they name it as something separated from Him, while they say God and nature? Is this nature again some intellect outside the universe, or a fifth, or sixth essence? Perhaps the Averroists will say: Nature is a single, perfect intellect, understanding all these things. But how will this intellect be the principle of motion and rest, insofar as it is what it is? Therefore, this intellect will be in living beings, fleas, and flies, and tiny plants, and elements, moving them with their own motions. Therefore, this single intellect will be not only in humans, but also in all things: why then do not all things understand? Is this blessed nature, which disposed the heavens, the members of bodies, and all organs, about which you say: that it does not fail in necessary things, nor does it do anything in vain? Because it admits no superfluous member, nor heaven, nor the vilest speck of dust, nor any superfluous motion, since it has disposed all things in the best possible way. But who is ordering all these things, unless He whom we profess to be God? Why then, speaking of nature, do you hint at something separated from God Himself? Perhaps lest you confess that God made the world, which you impiously denied: You have conceded, however, that God with nature si-
D

--- Page 188 ---
...acted together, as if God could not accomplish anything without nature. For what is the condition of this nature, that it should supply what the most perfect God lacks? Is this nature again produced by itself, or by God? If by itself: then there will be two beings having existence from themselves, and two first causes, finally two Gods. If it is produced by God: then God will be the maker of this universal nature: why not also of the particular? What dreams are these? They will say: In particulars, a particular cause concurs simultaneously with the universal. If the first cause concurs and acts together, does it understand what it does? Or is it of a worse condition than inferior causes? If it understands those particulars in which it acts together with nature, you foolishly say that it does not understand particulars.

CANTICI PRIMI

[Decorative initial V containing a figure of a man] From the harmony of the principles of things, and their describers agree.
                                                                                             Tonus II.
How great a discord will the wise men of the world clamor in their dogmas.
                                                                                             Cap. I.
That Catholic writers agree.                                                          Cap. II.
How great a dissonance the wise men of the world have cast as its foundations.
                                                                                                       Cap. III.
Philosophers also disagree in the matter of the soul.                            Cap. IIII.
That they no less disagree in writing about that end which all things seek.
                                                                                                       Cap. V.
Whence our [people] have drawn harmony, and they [the others] dissonance.
                                                                                                       Cap. VI.
Which teachers have sounded in harmony in the inner chambers of the divine and worldly instrument.
                                                                                                       Cap. VII.
Why the ancients were eager to hide the dogmas which they handed down under metaphors or enigmas.
                                                                                                       Cap. VIII.
How the discordant could be brought into harmony.                                  Cap. IX.
The assembly of the wise in the space of the world's generation.                         Cap. X.
Why the number six was assigned to creation, and the seventh day to rest.
                                                                                                       Cap. XI.
The harmony of the ancients in the unity of things.                                      Cap. XII.
Consensus concerning the first production of things.                                      Cap. XIII.

--- Page 189 ---
**SECOND TONE. 26**

**HOW GREAT A DISSONANCE IS FOUND AMONG THE DISCORDANT WISE MEN OF THE WORLD IN THEIR DOCTRINES. Chapter One.**

[Large decorative initial T] O great a dissonance do those who are called the wise men of the world both handle and agitate this worldly instrument, that their schools are unable to agree neither in doctrine, nor in morals, nor in religion, nor in the end for which they do all things. And they resound with such dreadful horror that no one can listen to them sounding together, with harmony utterly broken: which (as musicians define it) is the concord of strings or voices harmonizing in complete modes without any offense. But these men, nourished in the same school, taught under the same teacher, utterly disagree. The Socratic disciples Aristippus and Ariston so greatly disagree on the end: that the one placed our end in pleasure, while the other placed it in virtues. [Marginal note: Aristippus. Ariston] Aristotle's chief followers, Alexander and Averroes, splitting his doctrine, create a divergence, [Marginal note: Alexander] especially in the matter of the soul: since the former asserts it to be mortal, but the latter asserts a unique intellect in all things; [Marginal note: Averroes] who disagree not only among themselves, but also from the truth. But Aristotle, a student of Plato for more than twenty years, [Marginal note: Aristotle] so greatly disagreed with the doctrine and morals of his teacher that he accused him and pursued him with false slanders. The Saracen Algazel [Marginal note: Algazel] rises up against all philosophers: and the Arab Averroes strives to attack him, [Marginal note: Averroes] but like a snake, he is broken in the very attempt. Lucretius the Epicurean [Marginal note: Lucretius] disagrees both with his fellow students and with himself, now proclaiming that God has fellowship with mortals, now denying that he has it; thus in many other things, he pursues manifest dissonance. But the Pythagoreans, [Marginal note: Pythagoras] concerning the transmigration of souls, are utterly divided into many dissenting factions. Hiarcas the Brahman and Apollonius of Tyana [Marginal note: Hiarcas Apo. Th.] asserted that transmutations occurred even into beasts. From which arose those celebrated metamorphoses, in which they sing of one changed into a wolf, another into a nightingale, another into a laurel, and similar transformations. Iamblichus and Porphyry [Marginal note: Iamblichus Porphyry] utterly rejected such transmigrations into beasts, not admitting that the soul, once fixed in its center, could be torn out. But also Proclus, Hermias, and Syrianus [Marginal note: Proclus. Hermias Syrianus] considered it a horrible crime for a celestial soul to be cast down into beasts. Timaeus Locrus, a most noble Pythagorean, [Marginal note: Timaeus] asserts that these transmutations were introduced for the terror of men. Thales of Miletus [Marginal note: Thales] was of the opinion that water was the principle of all things: But his student Anaximander [Marginal note: Anaximander] believed the principles of things to be infinite: But his student's student Anaximenes attributed the causes of all things to infinite air: [Marginal note: Anaximenes. Anaxagoras] Whose disciples Anaxagoras and Diogenes, disagreeing, [Marginal note: Diogenes] the former persuaded himself that infinite matter, woven from dissimilar particles, was the principle of all genera and species, according to its own condition: But the latter was of the opinion that air (though endowed with divine reason) was the matter of things; it would be superfluous and inept to recount all the things by which
D ij

--- Page 190 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

The wise men of the world, disagreeing, strike a dreadful din into the ears of their listeners: This happens to them because they have departed from the one to whom all ought to converge, each going into his own way and the fabrication of his own speculations. Hence their dogmas (because without anything that enables all to exist and harmoniously agree), [Marginal note: Boëtius] founded in a confused multitude, are dissolved: For everything exists for this reason (says Boethius), because it is one in number; and all, even the most diverse instruments, are in harmony: [Marginal note: Muſici Diuerſi. Au. cõſonantia.-] because voices agree by the same proportion of numbers. For consonance (as musicians teach) is the harmony of similar and dissimilar voices reduced into one. Nor would they be dissonant: If when divine Plato (imbued with a certain divine power along with his Plotinus) raises his mind: If with Pythagoras he pursues the mysteries of God and nature with numbers and enigma

--- Page 191 ---
TOMVS SECVNDVS.                                 27
Chapter II. That Catholic writers agree.
**V**But those who confess one God, the maker of all, and the fount from which all waters of true wisdom emanate, all made as one voice, Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins, with the greatest harmony, both praise the same God and lay the foundations of the world's edifice. Moses, Job, David, Solomon, and all the Prophets, with those who wrote the Gospels, and Paul with the whole Apostolic company, together with the supercelestial intelligences, in God's assembly produce the sweetest harmony: indeed with diverse voices, yet with the same sound: For dissimilar voices do not produce dissonance, but harmony, provided they converge into one: For what harmony would there be if all the strings of a lyre produced a low or a high sound? Or if (to touch upon the principles of music) hypate, perhypate, lichanos, mese, paramese, and all subsequent strings of the instrument, so named by musicians, produced the gravest tone, that of the hypate, by which it represents Saturn? And what consonance of the planets would there be if all moved with the gravity of Saturn, or ran with the swiftness of the Moon? What beauty of the body also would there be if all members were eyes, or ears? For just as beauty (as the Peripatetics teach) results from various members harmonizing with each other: so from various voices arises diapentic, diapasonic, diatessaronic, or diatonic harmony: Which is not founded in various voices, but in a concordant sound, which results from those diverse voices.
Therefore, those sounding in the divine lyre do not generate dissonance: If John and Augustine are elevated to the fervent and acute seraphim: If Ambrose and Matthew utter voices among the grave thrones of maxims: If Luke and Gregory delight in cherubic sweetness: If Jerome with Mark, with the more robust voice of powers and virtues, suppresses and suffocates the dissonant blasts of heretics: If Solomon and Bernard sing epithalamia of the bridegroom and bride of the heavenly nuptials with Gabriel: And turning to the Greeks, Basil with Ezekiel always brings forth divine things with the higher minds. Gregory Nazianzen with Jeremiah, with a tragic voice, sympathizing with the patient bridegroom and bride, also laments the slaughter of those invited to their nuptials. Isaiah and John, whose surname is Chrysostom, resonate with the Archangels with wonderful eloquence. Daniel and John Damascene treat the sacraments of God with a clearer voice: but the latter describes lower and domestic influences, while the former describes the supercelestial fount, from which these lower things flow. And other harmonious singers have followed in this divine instrument.
Scotus and Francis correspond to the high-sounding Augustine: but the former with a slower movement makes a graver and more robust sound: while the latter with a swifter course resonates more acutely. Albert with weighty judgment, and by diligent investigation of the secrets of both natures, emulates Ambrose. Thomas Angelicus in voice and doctrine, and in ineffable sweetness, follows Bernard, but in breadth, follows Augustine. Bonaventure with Gregory sings together with a modulation more devout than learned. Giles and Peter Aureolus are redolent of Jerome with a certain Roman eloquence. Hen-
                                                                                                        D iij

**Marginal note:**
Wonderful agreement among themselves.

--- Page 192 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

Henry of Ghent, by the sublimity of his doctrine, refreshes elevated minds with Origen.
I omit the wonderful harmony of other prophets and doctors, how many and varied, both ancient and more recent, with various supreme minds, so that some resonate harmoniously in the upper part of the instrument, and others in the lower, just like musical birds, even of different species. But those who are called Philosophers and wise men of the world agree no more in voice or doctrine than animals of different kinds: some of which, emitting a bellow, some a neigh, others a bleat, others a roar, others a bark, or a bray, make such a din of dissonance that their harmony seems impossible, unless they are filled with the same spirit which can lead them to unanimous customs and sounds.
[Marginal note: Lactan.] For, as Firmianus says, dissonance happens to them because they have departed from that unique master of all truths and giver of harmony (as we said), rashly presuming to investigate by their own powers those things which God willed to be obscure rather than hidden, namely, the nature of heavenly and earthly things. These, far removed from us, can neither be touched by hand nor perceived by the senses; and yet they dispute about the reason of all these things in such a way that they want what they assert to seem proven and known. From this, not only have they themselves fallen into error, but they have also led very many others adhering to them, blind, with themselves into the pit of darkness and errors; and (alas, sad to say) daily lead still others.

With how much dissonance the wise men of the world laid its foundations. Chapter III.

[Large decorative initial E] And so that we may prove true what we have said, let us again bring forth some examples from their foundations, but few, lest many (examples) with their dissonance weary readers and make them sick, and lest we seem to have made a compilation from those things with which others have filled very many books. And first,
[Marginal notes: Leucippus, Democritus, Diodorus] let us pour forth the outrageous doctrines of Leucippus, Democritus, and Diodorus, who supposed that certain corpuscles existed, some smooth, others rough, others round, others partly angular, some pointed, some hooked, and that from these, heaven and earth were made, with no nature compelling, by a certain fortuitous concourse.
[Marginal note: Thales] Thales of Miletus, declared wise by the testimony of his Apollo, believed water to be the principle of all things, since all parts of an animal seemed to him to be nourished by water, which resides as it were in the middle, just as in the center of animal bodies, watery humor exists and provides nourishment to all members. The ancients called this water Tethys, and fixed in a swamp, and they considered its power feminine, like Neptune's masculine, which, being stable, would more perfectly receive the concourse of all stars.
[Marginal notes: Anaximenes, Diogenes] Anaximenes the Epicurean and Diogenes the freedman agreed on a single principle, but they believed that to be air, prior to water, and the medium of respiration, by which growth is sustained. For spirit and air are called by a mutual name among the Hebrews.
[Marginal notes: Hipparchus, Heraclitus] But Hipparchus of Metapontum and Heraclitus of Ephesus said that the one principle was fire, because it is the most subtle of all bodies, and from which the heavens were first compacted. These, existing as a certain light, send forth their light, moving all things and being commingled with all things, so that from it all things (by discord and friendship inter-

--- Page 193 ---
TONE SECOND.                                                                    28

intervening) are generated. Empedocles, son of Meton, from Sicily, so that he  Emped.
would not err, taught that all four elements were that one principle. Whom the  Poets
poets, following him, said Jupiter was the ethereal principle, Pluto the earthly, Almana Juno the
airy, and Mesti (who nourishes the rivers of men with wet tears) was the watery principle.
Empedocles further states that earth is the matter, and the primary subject of all things:  Empedo.
which holds the forms and shapes of things: which water, air, fire cannot do. Anaxagoras  Anaxa.
of Clazomenae believed all bodies to be homogeneous, and parts (homoeomeriae) subject to continuous
division: and that, collected together, they form the subjective principle.
Pythagoras, ascending higher than many believe, judged numbers and their subject,  Pythag.
measures, that is, adapted proportions (which they call harmonies, concords, and
coherences) to be the principles of things: not indeed those numbers which
merchants use: but formal, or natural ones: the knowledge of which is hidden among those
who have learned to philosophize and theologize through numbers. Whom Pythagoras
was followed by Alcmaeon of Croton, who said one was the effective principle,  Alcm.
but two, or the infinite dyad, was the material subjective principle, and the beginning of all
multitude. Anaximander of Miletus, having progressed further, considered a certain  Anaxi.
                                                                                                                            Mil.
infinity (which they call indeterminate matter) to be the subjective principle. And
because by its very nature it lacks quantity and form, he believed it to be the sub-
stance of perpetual generation: so that infinite worlds are regenerated: and are regenerated
into infinity. Epicurus, son of Neocles, an Athenian, following in the footsteps of Democritus in  Epicur.
philosophizing, said the principles of things were corporeal, solid, uncreated, perceived by the
mind, eternal: which can neither be corrupted, nor crushed, nor changed in any way:
To these principles, beyond the form and magnitude which their teachers gave them,
he also attributed weight. Socrates, son of Sophronicus, and Plato, son of Ariston,  Socrates
                                                                                                                            Plato.
both Athenians, posited three principles: God, Matter, and Idea. Aristotle,  Aristote.
of Stagira, son of Nicomachus, indeed asserts as principles entelechy, or form,
matter, and privation: and numbers privation among the principles:
contrary to what he had taught elsewhere, namely that equivocal terms are not to be numbered. Zeno,  Zeno.
son of Mnaseas, of Citium, indeed places God and matter as principles, so that the former is the agent,
and the latter is the patient: and four intermediate elements. That Diodorus  Dio. Si.
Siculus, seeking higher things, wished to describe this generation of the world:
but after he wandered through many things concerning his Osiris, he confuses readers more
than he teaches. Here indeed I wonder greatly, that from none of those who constitute
matter as the subjective principle, do we have (an answer to): whether it was fabricated by the
blessed God, or whether that creative nature, devoid of the beauty of all forms, fabricated the world with
Him, or whether, lacking all form, it was the coeternal companion and spouse of Demogorgon,
father of the gods (as poets dream), or whether, like Pallas, it sprang from the brain of Jupiter.
The mind does not rest while we contemplate nature, lacking all virtue and all form, without its maker.
But who that maker himself was, we have from none of them.
                                                                                                                            D iiij

--- Page 194 ---
CANTICLE ONE

Philosophers also disagree concerning the business of the soul. Chapter IV.

[Marginal notes: Aristo. Lucre. Anaxi.]
[Large decorative initial M] Oreover, they disagreed more in describing the nature and ori-
gin of the soul. Nor is it surprising: since Aristotle considers
knowledge of it to be among the most difficult things; to whom Lucretius
assents, proclaiming: *Many are ignorant of what the nature of the soul is*.
Anaximander of Miletus [said that] from heated earth, corpuscles, fish, or
[Marginal note: Thales.] animals similar to fish were formed, and from these, man grew until puberty, by which he could nourish himself. Thales, his
fellow citizen, believed that matter similar to fire had coalesced from earth; and from this, man.
[Marginal notes: Pythag. Dicear. Anaxi. Xenop. Parme. Boëtes Epicur.] Some of the Pythagoreans [said the soul was] minute things that are in the air; others, that which moves them. Dicaearchus
[said] the soul is a body moving from itself. Anaximenes [said] air; Xenophanes [said] from earth
and water; Parmenides and Boëtes [said] from earth and fire; Epicurus [said it was] mixed from fire, air,
and spirit, emerging according to the likeness of atoms: Wherefore, when one [atom/spirit] is moved,
all spirit is moved; whence sometimes, when snow is perceived, it happens that whiteness and cold are si-
multaneously recalled by man. Or when someone eats bitter things: some are astonished;
And others yawn with those who yawn. In this, [he was] following the most ancient Maurasphes Ara-
bs: Who confessed the entry of this spirit into the soul, but by no means its exit,

[Marginal notes: Diog. cy. Anaxim. Emped. Auëdac. Anaxa. Cra. the. Democ. Leucip. Circias Maro Hippoc. Asclepia. Zeno]
since they say it is not to be resolved into nothing: as is set down in their theology. Diogenes
the Cynic, with Anaximenes, believes the soul to be air; Empedocles [said] from several
elements; Auëdachus [said] from several elements, love, and victory; Anaxagoras,
contemplator of the heavens, [said it was] something impassible, not receiving passions; Crates the Theban [said] there is no


--- Page 195 ---
**TONVS SECVNDVS. 29**

...so that no one yet clearly defines what it feels. From this, his principal followers, Alexander [Alexan.] and Averroes [Auerrois], made a crossroads: and how far each of them is removed from all piety, religion, and truth is now evident. Pythagoras [Pytha.] believed the soul to be a certain divine kind of being inherent in humans, full of forms indeed, but submerged and hindered by the corporeal forest: so that it seems to have drunk from the Lethaean river, that is, oblivion. Timaeus Locrus [Tim. lo.] and Plato [Plato] with the other Academics imitate him. However, they strove to conceal the essence and nature of this soul as if they were divine sacraments, as was their custom; or they did not express what perhaps they themselves had not understood: as Plato [Idem] testifies in *Laws* 10: "What kind of soul it is," he says, "and what power it has, almost all seem to have been ignorant." If they did transmit anything about it, they proceeded through numbers as if these were more known to them: not perceiving the fourfold nature of these numbers, and how one ascends from the vocal to the formal, and thence to the rational, from which to the divine number, they either judged this progression through number to be a kind of delusion; or, treading with longer and more circuitous steps, after Pythagoras [Pytha.] and Plato [Plato], they deviated into various paths. Anaxander [Anaxan.] said the soul is a number; Aristoxenus [Aristo.] said it is a number moving itself. Others believed the soul to be from unity, as from the indivisible; and from duality, as from the divisible. Severus [Seuer.] asserts that it has a geometric essence, composing it from a point and distance: the latter indeed divisible, the former truly indivisible. Plutarch [Plutar.] and Atticus [Atticus] say that its passible part is irrational; the impartible part is divine: the divine part indeed emanating and composing; the other truly holding the place of the subject. They add, moreover, that the soul is unbegotten according to its subject, but begotten according to its form. Plotinus [Plotinus], speaking more physically, places it midway between intellect and sense: the former indeed individual, the latter truly divisible even through bodies. Asmeus [Asme.] and Theodorus [Theod.] ascend higher, and drawing (according to Porphyry [Prophy.]) the origin of their opinion from Persia, they posit two intellects before their soul: one indeed containing the idea of universals, the other of particulars, and the soul as the middle ground between these. Proclus [Procul.] posits it as unique and manifold, individual and multiplied according to the number of subjects: Nor did he explain Plato's [Plato] opinion about it, emulating the same master who in many places (especially when writing to Dionysius) protests that the sacraments of God are not to be made public. Nor do these wise men of the world agree with any consistency on where the soul is located. Hippocrates [Hippo.] asserts that the principal power of the soul has its seat in the head. Epicurus denies this: because many animals live for a time with their heads cut off, as if no damage were done to the whole; such as bees and drones. Empedocles [Emped.] established the principal force of the soul in the heart. But Epicurus also denies this: because crocodiles live for some time with their hearts torn out, and resist violence. The Stoics [Stoici] place it in the heart, not mediated by blood (as Empedocles said), but by spirit, so that it is located in the spirit rather than in the heart: as Chrysippus [Chrysi.] implies. Others [place it] in the blood, which seems to be drawn from Moses [Moses]: who (by divine oracle commanding) forbids the eating of blood: because the soul of the animal is in it. Philosophers and physicians still dispute this matter, awaiting judgment.

**D v.**

--- Page 196 ---
**Of the First Canticle**

That they disagree no less in describing that end which all things seek. Chapter V.

[Decorative initial L]ong and tedious would it be to present all the various opinions concerning the end of this our life and condition. Augustine mentions two hundred and eighty-eight opinions collected by M. Varro. Six are also mentioned by Plotinus in his 'On Beatitude'; omitting these, we will more briefly survey those which are more frequently discussed in schools and in public places. Zeno of Citium, Cleanthes, Posidonius, Hecato, Dionysius the Babylonian, all Stoics, considered our end to be laborious virtues; but Antisthenes expressed that it is in the virtue of the soul. The Epicureans, however, especially Aristippus, Eudoxus of Cnidus, and the Cyrenaics, placed it in pleasures, which are contrary to toil. The Peripatetics in contemplation. The Platonists, always recalling divine decrees, gave decrees sufficiently akin to the Christian religion. These decree the union with the highest good as the end of man, as Plotinus in the cal[ce].

--- Page 197 ---
TONVS SECVNDVS. 36

you may be ignorant of to whom you should award the palm, until (as Firmianus says) someone descends from heaven to pass judgment on the opinions of individuals. But in the meantime, since we cannot tolerate those who are dissonant, let us leave them aside and return to our own.

Whence our people derived consonance, and those others dissonance. Chapter VI.

[Decorative initial Q] As many as have handed down the principles of music teach that the foundation of consonance is one: into which many similar and dissimilar things converge. And the harmonious sound, which many singing together make, poets and grammarians call Polymnia, as if it were a convergence of many songs into one. Hence it is necessary for this harmony to proceed from instruments, strings, pipes, or suitable voices, if sounds or harmonious voices are to converge into one. For no one will make the roar of lions, the lowing of oxen, the neighing of a horse, or the braying of an ass converge. Nor can strings made from the sinews of a wolf and a lamb (as we have learned by experience) be brought into any consonance, because their foundations are dissonant. Nevertheless, the voices of men of different languages and nations converge easily, because their foundation is unique according to species. And many musical birds of different species converge, because their genus is uniquely related, and they share a symbol from above. And artificial instruments converge together, and with natural voices, because in both there is a similarity, either true and expressed, or through a certain analogy. Our doctors also agree, for whom the canon of sacred letters is fixed and determined (says Augustine), so that they do not dissent for any reason: because they laid the foundations of all wisdom with one and the true author [August.]: upon which innumerable doctors, variously arranged, in different climates, in successive times, with diverse temperaments, and multiple languages, have with the highest consonance erected diverse edifices. Which could in no way have happened, unless they had been illuminated by the rays of the same divine intellect (as the Platonists say), or (as Catholics assert) had been taught by the same Holy Spirit [Plato.], who makes the harmonious dwell in the house, and who easily grants to all one heart and one soul. Filled with this Spirit, the ancient prophets, Apostles, and true sounding instruments of the divine, did not prattle in schools or gymnasia with litigious disputes: but in fields, and in cities, and in crowded multitudes, acting with the learned and the unlearned, with princes and peoples, they proposed those doctrines with such constancy that they confirmed those truths with the sanctity and splendor of their lives, with many miracles, and with their own blood. But the world's people, I will not call them harmonizers but dissonant ones (because they disagreed in their foundation), became utterly discordant. These therefore, having become wise in their own eyes, either partly or entirely abolished religion: they scorned oracles: relying on their own strengths and inventions, each one re-echoing with his own voice, they so disagreed that some assert one world, others innumerable worlds. And among those who confess it to be one, some assert it has no origin, others no beginning; some that it will perish, others that it will always exist; some that it is moved by a divine mind, others by chance and accidents; some that souls are immortal, others mortal; others that they are reborn into beasts.

--- Page 198 ---
OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

...others by no means (revolved into beasts): But those who (believe the soul to be) mortal, some (say it) perishes soon after the body, others even live afterwards, either for a short while, or longer, but not always: Some established the end of good in the body, others in the soul, others in both. You will find these, and other almost innumerable dissensions of philosophers: so that you may perceive them to have built not a harmonious consonance, but a Babylonian confusion: The builder of whose citadel, Nimrod, under whom the first confusion of tongues occurred, wishing to attempt things higher than his strength, decided to build the tower itself up to the heavens: so that, removed from alteration, and surrounded by a veil subject to alteration, he might contemplate heaven and supermundane things by his own strength. Following him, these wise men of the world have become either citizens of Babylon and confusion: or, flying higher than they ought, like Icarus, they have been drowned in the waters, as the supreme craftsman protests through the oracle of [Marginal note: Isaias Paulus Abdias] Isaiah, Paul, and Obadiah, who says: "I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and I will reject the understanding of the prudent." If, however, they handed down any truths among the many falsehoods they opined: they learned these without any doubt from divine voices: because the secrets of the most high God cannot be apprehended by our strength. [Marginal note: Plato] Therefore Plato often warns: that young people, and those not yet initiated, should not rashly pronounce judgment on divine matters: but should believe the laws: until, with age maturing, through the due degrees of disciplines, and through a certain separation of the soul, their eyes may be revealed: which all possess, but very few truly use: Or (as Plo- [Marginal note: Platonus Procul.] tinus and Proclus say) a light more united to itself than natural may shine forth from God: by which we know God himself and the father of all: and his primal [Marginal note: Plato] making, and immediate, and hidden operation: Which light Plato called the Sun, but the natural (light) the Moon. By this solar light, a great multitude of our harmonious ones, some preceded by a certain prelude, such as Moses, Job, Solomon, Isaiah, and the other prophets: Who divinely personified the sweetest precention under the figure of a worldly instrument with such sweetness, that purified ears are never offended, and never grow weary. But the Apostles and Evangelists made a more explicit sound: Whom innumerable Hebrews, Chaldeans, Greeks, and Latins followed, filling the world with most consonant books.

Which doctors in the divine and worldly instrument have harmoniously personified concerning the innermost secrets. Chapter VII.

[Marginal note: Heb. Au. varius p cedẽ. mo dus.] [Large decorative initial P] LURIMI succentors among the Hebrews were in these songs: and they apprehended a twofold path. Some, declaring and expounding scripture and the law, insofar as it pertains to this sensible and lower world, and to active life, were called Talmudists. Others, leaving the care of worldly things, judicial matters, and all manner of use concerning both the Republic and private affairs to the Talmudists, and devoting themselves to contemplation and the supernal life, referred all that was written to the archetype: and in that, they interpreted all things either by numbers, or by symbolic reason, or by anagogical sense. And from both of these are those who proceed by both ways. But for others, it is enough to be fed only by the bark of the letter, like Rabbi Solomon, David, Kimhi,

--- Page 199 ---
TOMVS SECVNDVS. 31

Levi ben Gerson, Rebunachi: Among these are Moses son of Maimon, called the E-
gyptian, whom they call Rambam, and very many others. But the Cabalists, who
received from the true oracle (for Cabala is said to be reception by mouth) or learned from those taught by
such, pursuing the more secret meanings of the law, of the many who wrote, these are: First Enoch:
of whom Thaddeus makes mention in his epistle, and Origen in Periarchon:
Abraham the patriarch, published a concise and weighty volume concerning formation,
although some believe its author to be Rabbi Akiva, yet from the mind of Abraham.
Simeon ben Yochai, who, hiding in a cave for more than twenty-four years, wrote the Zohar
(which is called a luminary): Whom Elkanah follows with a marvelous elevation of mind.
After these: Abraham Abulafia, Joseph Gikatilla, Abraham ibn Ezra, Amram ben Hanina,
Azriel of Gerona, Hai Gaon, Reuben the Spaniard, Aaron Mechubal, Rabbi Jacob on the
royal robe, fillet, or diadem. Meir Marom, Nehurai, Bonastruc de Porta, Meir son of Theodore father of Moses,
Butriel, Sebadia, Moses of Gerona son of Nahman: who is written Ramban with an 'n':
Joseph Gikatilla, Menahem Recanati, Judah Nagid, who is called Saint Rabbi Joseph Albo,
Rabbi Moses de León, Rabbi Amram, Rabbi Bahya.
And on the book of Yetzirah, commentaries were published by Jacob Cohen: Rabbi Moses, Rab-
bi Isaac, Rabbi Todros Levi, Rabbi Samuel, no less imbued with Platonic and Peripatetic
than with Cabalistic discipline: Abraham of Olam Haba: that is, of the world to come.
And we have seen many other volumes, whose certain authors we do not have, such as Gate
of Light, Gate of Justice, Book of Secrets, Book of Sabbath, Book [Marginal note: Books by un-]
of Counsel, On the Order of Wills, Knowledge of Discovery, On the Gracious City, On [Marginal note: certain au-]
Errors, Lamp of God, Book of the Decade, or of the Denarius, Treasury of Lives, Secret [Marginal note: thors.]
of Faith, Light of the Eyes, Crown of the Good Name, Sefer Temunot, Merkavah of Eze-
kiel, On the Secrets of Prayers, Imrei Shefer, that is, Eloquence of Beauty. And many
others wrote, whose volumes have not yet been delivered to our hands.
There were also very many who, even if they did not write, yet, having persevered for a long
time, became most skilled in that doctrine, and earned that most famous college of seventy
wise men (which they called the Sanhedrin): in which (as some assert) our Paul was first
educated at the feet of Gamaliel: For into this, none were admitted unless they excelled in
languages and knowledge of secret things: Among whom (after those seventy to whom Moses, by
God's command, imparted of His spirit, as we read in the Book of Numbers) were many Prophets
and distinguished men. But [Marginal note: Numbers] to omit the Prophets, and those most known to the whole world, Ezra first (as it is said) [Marginal note: Author.]
committed these most sacred monuments to seventy volumes: which previously [Marginal note: Hebrews.]
were taught only by mouth. But he entrusted the understanding of what he wrote to Simeon the Just, the great priest and prefect of the synagogue: From whom Antigonus and his companions received it.
After him, Joseph son of Loëtze, and Joseph son of Johanan of Jerusalem: And from these,
Joshua son of Perahiah, and Nittai of Arbela: From whom Judah son of Tabbai,
and Simeon son of Shetach, and from these Shemaiah, and Abtalion: From whom Hillel, and

--- Page 200 ---
C A N T I C L E   O N E

Shammai, who had many thousands of disciples. And from these grew a very
great crowd: Rabban Johanan ben Zakkai, Eliezer son of Hyrcanus, Joshua son of Ananias,
Joseph Kohen, Simeon son of Nataniel, & Eleazar son of Arach, & almost infinite [others]:
whose opinions were celebrated partly in the Talmud, partly by those who wrote cabalistically
[Marginal note: Christian authors.]
. But among those who followed the true Messiah, our Paul and John, pursuing those
magnificent ideas everywhere, wrote more profoundly than others. But among
those who produced commentaries (as I seem to see), no one perceived those more secret mysteries
except Dionysius & Origen: But the latter, either because he strove with the Prophet to hide
the words of God entrusted to him, lest he sin: or because, having sworn an oath to his teacher Ammonius,
he did not dare to openly produce those things which were bubbling in his mind:
Therefore, he always ran more lightly through the bark, yet with this rule, that he might hint at the more
secret core to the experienced: although from certain words spoken against Celsus, some
assert that he had deviated from this kind of School, and, having followed only Platonic dogmas,
had penetrated to those more secret nourishments. But (unless I am mistaken) in many things
his doctrine, like the Plato- [Marginal note: External authors.] nic, is redolent of Hebrew Theology. But among external [authors] who
followed those paths, Pythagoras is preeminent. After whom Plato with his Academics, Eudoxus,
Archytas of Tarentum, Philolaus, the Brahmins, from whom Apollonius of Tyana,
& as many as followed the Pythagorean school: Who received [their teachings] either directly from the Prophets,
or from their hearers. But all of them handed down their dogmas enclosed under veils,
& curtains, so that no one could understand unless they themselves taught him with a living voice:
and [no one could] seek out the mysteries they dealt with, and their institutions. Hence,
posterity, not understanding those most profound ideas pertaining to the super-excellent
divinity, descended to other kinds of interpretation, Greeks and Latins, & very many of the Hebrews.

Why the ancients studied to hide the dogmas they handed down under metaphors
& enigmas. Chapter VIII.

[Large decorative initial S] It was always the study of the ancients to envelop and cover the mysteries of God, & nature,
and to hide the words of God entrusted to them in their heart: lest they sin:
Which law was observed by the Brahmins from India, Ethio- [Marginal note: Mercury.] pians, Persians, & Egyptians.
Hence their illustrious Mercury said: 'It is of an irreligious mind to publish to the consciousness
of many a treatise most full of the entire majesty of the divine.' This Orpheus, & all ancient
seers, this Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristoxenus, Ammonius preserved with inviolable faith.
Hence Herennius, Plotinus, & Origen (as Porphyry writes in 'On the Education &
Discipline of Plotinus') swore that they would not publish the dogmas of Ammonius: And because Plotinus,
having violated the oath sworn to Ammonius, published the mysteries, as punishment for the transgression
(as some assert) he was consumed by a horrible affliction of lice. Glo- [Marginal note: Alexander. Themistius.] ries
also the leader of the Peripatetics, Alexander (Themistius relating), that he handed down his natural
institutions with this law, that no one should understand, unless he who handed them down
interpre- [Marginal note: Jesus.] ting [them] himself. But omitting external [authors], the highest teacher of all, & redeemer Jesus, son

--- Page 201 ---
**TONVS SECVNDVS. 32**

God teaches his disciples not to give what is holy to dogs, nor to cast pearls before swine to be trampled underfoot. These teachings of the master, which the disciples were to preserve, they either did not write down, or they handed down for all to observe only those things which pertain to miracles, the ordering of morals, and the institutions of the law. Thus did all the Apostles and Evangelists, with the exception of Paul and John. For John, with three Gospels already published and many years having passed, in order to extirpate the heresy of the Ebionites, who asserted that Christ was a man but not God, pronounced some things briefly and obscurely concerning the eternal generation of the Son of God and concerning man's union with God through Him, after our first animal nature was mortified. The Apocalypse, however, involves so many mysteries in enigmas that neither Oedipus, who alone solved the Sphinx's riddles, nor Solomon, who solved the riddles of the Queen of Sheba, nor anyone else could unravel them, unless imbued with the same spirit with which he who wrote it was full.

But Paul, since he perceived that the fashion of this world was passing away, chose some, or rather a few, disciples, about whom he says: *But we, with unveiled face, beholding the glory of the Lord*, [Marginal note: Paulus] regretting that he did not have very many well-initiated disciples to whom he could entrust these mysteries. And he complains about the Hebrews, who were still particularly rude and uncultivated, saying: *We have a great discourse, and one that is difficult to explain, because you have become dull of hearing. For though by this time you ought to be teachers, you need someone to teach you again what are the elementary principles of the oracles of God. And you have become those who need milk, not solid food. But solid food is for the mature, for those who by constant practice have their senses trained to distinguish good and evil.*

But note what follows. *Therefore, leaving the elementary doctrine of Christ, let us go on to maturity, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works and of faith toward God, of spiritual gifts, of doctrine, and also of the laying on of hands, and of the resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment. And this indeed we will do, if God permits. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, who have also tasted the heavenly gift, and have become partakers of the Holy Spirit, and have also tasted the good word of God and the powers of the age to come, and have fallen away, to be renewed again to repentance.*
In these words two things are to be noted. The first, that the Apostle hints that he holds in the treasury of his heart doctrines beyond those concerning repentance, baptism, the resurrection of the dead, judgment, and suchlike, about which theologians write most fully. The second is, what is the case from which he judges it impossible to be relieved by repentance, if one has revealed to the unworthy those things which ought to be hidden, or if someone, unworthily receiving such a great sacrament, inflicts injury upon it. Therefore, the Apostle distinguishes more perfect disciples: among whom he speaks those things which pertain to higher wisdom, having become a disciple of the true master: who revealed the name of God the Father only to those whom the Father himself had given; and he chose those to whom he spoke the mystery of the kingdom of God, apart from those whom he taught in parables.

Thus to Ezra (as we read in his fourth book) [Marginal note: Ezra.] God declared in these words: *Revealing, I was revealed upon the bush, and I spoke to Moses, when my people served in Egypt; and I brought him upon Mount Sinai; and I kept him with me for many days; and I narrated to him many wondrous things,*

--- Page 202 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

& I showed him the secrets of the times, & the end: & I commanded him, saying: These words, O God, you shall make public: & these you shall hide. For he made public the precepts of the law, the genealogy of Christ, some very brief histories of the ancient fathers, yet with their mystery kept secret: Likewise, sacrifices, ceremonies, the construction of the ark, the war with the Amalekites, & with the other kings of various nations: and the wiser Hebrews call this the written law: in which higher meanings are contained than many might conceive: The knowledge of which meanings the aforesaid wise men call the law from mouth to mouth: Which, according to the precept of the living God, Moses reserved by word of mouth to seventy elders: whose succession lasted until the captivity made by Nebuchadnezzar: at which time it ceased, or was diminished until Cyrus: for then (the divine spirit suggesting, five thousand four hundred vessels of the temple having been assigned, and the captivity having been dissolved, & families having been sent back to the number of forty-two thousand, three hundred & seventy, except for servants, & maidservants) under the hand of Zerubbabel, Nehemiah, & Ezra, the temple of the Lord began to be rebuilt: Which having been restored, & the sacred rites having been restored (the Lord commanding), he reduced that doctrine into seventy volumes, according to the number of the elders, lest they should be dispersed: yet with this law of the living God, that they should not be expounded to the unlearned. For the first things (he says) which you wrote, namely the text of the law, you shall make public, let the worthy, & the unworthy read them: But the seventy newest books you shall preserve, so that you may hand them over to the wise among your people: For in these is the vein of understanding, the fount of wisdom, & the river of knowledge: which are enclosed under a bark by divine & inconceivable artifice. And lest these things be scorned as Apocrypha, let us see what Dionysius states in favor of this matter: It was most fitting (he says) that divine, & incomprehensible things should be hidden by enigmas: & to place the sacred, & hidden truth of supermundane understandings out of reach for many. For not everything is sacred, nor is knowledge for all (as the oracles say): & having progressed a little, he says: O Timothy, made divine in divine doctrine, guarding in the secret of your soul those things which are holy from the impure multitude, keep these as uniform. For it is not right to cast before swine the unconfused, & luminous, & beneficial adornment of invisible pearls. Therefore, not departing from that law of the Most High God, celebrated with such observance by the fathers of the Old, & New Testaments, & by the wise men of the world, we shall propose the solid food of wisdom to more solid souls with gravity & reverence: so that the worthy may receive it: & the brutal swine, & the rest of the unworthy, may not trample upon it. Therefore we shall philosophize about God (as Nazianzen teaches) to whom, when, how, & as much as shall be necessary, committing to scripture as much as the Lord shall permit: & shall judge worthy of revelation, reserving those things which are only to be communicated by word of mouth among the wise.

How the Dissonant Could Be Harmonized. Chapter IX.

[Decorative initial 'U' containing a figure playing a stringed instrument]
So that we may not admit anything harsh, & dissonant into our harmony, which is the concord of all strings in complete modes without offending consonances: we shall introduce the philosophers of the world, as harmonizers, into it, making them consonant: provided that their instruments, or elements—

--- Page 203 ---
**TONVS SECVNDVS. 33**

...are willing to adapt their matters to the strings. Indeed, they will do so if they are willing to confess God (as nature teaches, religion persuades, reason approves) as the author and maker of the universe: because all human wisdom is placed in this alone (says Firmianus) that one may know and worship God. [Marginal note: Lactan.] Therefore, let us embrace Him as the one true [source] of all things, and the one principle, the free creator, and the supreme fount from whom all truth emanates. Then easily the sounds of all dissimilar voices will come into the same harmony: which results from similar and dissimilar voices: just as so many very diverse members, bound by a single life, are consonant in the same body: just as the parts of the earthly body also come together in the sweetest concord: because they are permeated and bound by a single life: For there is one spirit of life in them, rendering all most consonant. Moreover, all members of the mystical and ecclesiastical body come together in the sweetest melody: when they live that one life, which says: I am the way, the truth, and the life: [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] By whose spirit the early fathers were imbued, and it was made for all of them (says Luke) one heart and one soul. [Marginal note: Lucas.] And all those of diverse languages were instructed by the single voice of the Apostles, not without the admiration of those present. By this same spirit, our doctors, imbued and enlightened, though with diverse instruments and various songs, nevertheless resounded most harmoniously. And to begin with the principal ones, four Greeks and four Latins sang in God's assembly, as bases and foundations of our Theology, along with those four who handed down the evangelical elements in four distinct, yet consonant, songs. For Jerome [Marginal note: Hiero.] and Chrysostom [Marginal note: Chryso.] unravel the literal shell. Both Gregory the Roman [Marginal note: Gregor.] and Nazianzen [Marginal note: Nazian.] pursue the matter of the soul hidden beneath the bark. Damascene [Marginal note: Damascen.] with Ambrose fixes weighty sentences and allegorical meanings. Augustine with Basil [Marginal note: Basili.] soars in an Anagogical song to proclaim the highest things: And those who preceded up to the times of Jerome, he himself in *De Illustribus Viris* commemorates as known to him, seven and thirty beyond a hundred: [Marginal note: Hieron.] To whom Gennadius, the presbyter of Marseille, adds one above ninety. [Marginal note: Genad.] And many countless others followed these, up to the times of Peter Lombard: [Marginal note: Petr. lōb.] who, emulating Damascene, [Marginal note: Damasc.] reducing and distinguishing theological doctrine into four volumes, provided material for disputation to posterity. In this disputative genre, members of the Minorite friars wrote, up to Bartholomew of Pisa, who commemorates them as a hundred and more. But those of diverse professions, nations, and languages grew so much, resounding with wonderful concord, that we can assign neither an end to the sound nor a number to the strings: of whom it may be said: I saw a great multitude: which no one could number except Him who numbers the multitude of the stars. All, however, come together in wonderful harmony: because they are enlightened by the supreme teacher and the supreme light, from whom all light and truth emanates. But those who rely on their own strengths feel that prophetic saying proven in themselves: Every man is a liar: For God alone contains the fount of truth, from which it is necessary to draw: if we intend to hand down true and harmonious doctrines: since there is nothing concerning separate substances,

**E**

--- Page 204 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

concerning the secrets of nature, and concerning knowledge of its author, God, unless divinely revealed. For divine things are not grasped, and worldly things escape the senses at any moment; hence it happens that what they call wisdom and certain knowledge, whether concerning heavenly things, or
[Marginal note: Isaiah] concerning natural things, is the purest error, or a grosser obscurity. Hence Isaiah, illuminated by true light, reproaches the Chaldeans, and Philosophers, and the wise of the world, saying: "Your wisdom and your knowledge itself has deceived you; let the astrologers, observers of the heavens, and soothsayers save you." Therefore we know only as much as the intellect, placed at the pinnacle of the human soul, pure, lucid, and perspicuous, beholds in the mirror of eternity. Relying on this light, let us come to the harmony of particular doctrines, confirming
[Marginal note: August.] what Augustine teaches on Genesis: that whatever Philosophers were able to demonstrate concerning the nature of things with true proofs is not contrary to our scriptures. But if they have said anything false, it is necessary that their ingenuity falls flat. Therefore, let us descend to these particular elements.

Agreement of the wise concerning the time of the world's creation. Chapter X.

**P**resupposing the fabric of the world, which we proved above, let us also acknowledge this new point: as both the sacred scriptures teach and all mathematicians confirm, while from the very Genesis of the world, those events which are to be in it are predicted; therefore, let us see in how much time it was made. It is the doctrine of the wise: that He who remains in eternity created
[Marginal notes: Idem
Albertus
Mag. sen.] all things at once. To this agree Augustine, Albertus, the Master of the Sentences, with the Hebrew doctors, and all who think correctly. For finite and determined power requires time in acting, but infinite power by no means does, such as that of the supreme craftsman – not indeed well measured by the accursed Arab, and by others who said that God does not work with infinite power, because an infinite work was not produced. For He used His boundless power in creating, although He did not unfold that infinite power into the work, but enclosed it within the limits He wished, which He also produced by commanding. Since therefore He produced all things by command and
[Marginal note: David] word, as the Prophet says: "He spoke, and they were made; He commanded, and they were created." For the word having been spoken, "Let there be light," or "Let there be a firmament," or "a globe of the heavens in the midst of the waters," or "Let the earth bring forth green herb": why was light made with such delay, until the space of the day passed and evening came? And why was the germination of the earth delayed until the third day, and the production of the Sun, Moon, and Stars until the fourth? And why was the generation of water creatures given only on the fifth? And why was the formation of man celebrated on the sixth? And why was the seventh appointed for rest?
[Marginal note: August.] Let them say if they have anything. Augustine laughs at these, deservedly to be laughed at, who think that God requires time in acting. Nor must we contend with outsiders (who say the world is uncreated, or not seeing the cause of its newness, assert it to be from eternity and produced all at once):
But with our own people, who, not perceiving the mysteries of the scriptures, contend to save the killing letter.
[Marginal note: August.] Hence sometimes (as the same Augustine says) they descend to an unworthy crime—

--- Page 205 ---
**SECOND TONE.**
                                                                34
they come [to this]: if the meaning is always extracted according to the words. Nor does Origen
admit among the sensible those who think that the first, second, and third days, Orige,
in which evening and morning are said to have occurred, happened without the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and that the first day was without Heaven. For indeed, they inflict a great
injury upon the supreme and eternal Creator, to whom all things are present,
while they think Him to work through time and succession, whose measure is
eternity, and whose entire possession is at once. Nor ought the members of this mundane
animal (says Hiarchas, prince of the Brahmins) to be produced separately, but Hiarh.
at once: for almost all ancients agree that the world is an animal, and also some Peripate.
of the Peripatetics; nor does Augustine deny it. Therefore, concerning the making August.
of this [world] completed all at once, Moses himself, repeating that which he seemed
to have distinguished by days, asserts it to have been produced at once, on one and the same
day, saying: "These are the generations of the heaven and the earth: when they were
created in the day that the Lord God created the earth and the heaven, and

--- Page 206 ---
CANTICLE ONE

they wanted this cloud of theirs: since the ethereal region in no way admits it, being alien from every foreign impression? Nor could a small cloud in the air near the earth illuminate the whole hemisphere: for the magnitude of the Sun, and its proper altitude, cause the whole hemisphere to be illuminated, and a pyramidal shadow to be cast in the other hemisphere: which causes night and darkness in the entire space of the pyramid. And because the pyramidal shadow does not cross the orbit of the Moon, therefore the Stars, not being occupied by that shadow of the earth, suffer no Eclipse: but continuously receive the light which they direct towards us. How, moreover, could this cloud illuminating the air cause day from evening and morning: since the air was not yet distinct: nor was there a firmament, or a globe of the heavens, nor were the supercelestial waters divided from the lower ones? Indeed, that all things were in confusion is stated in the text, up to the second day.

They also inflict no small calumny upon the supreme Creator with this cloud of theirs, believing that God fashioned an imperfect world, and lit an adventitious light until He should light His own proper light: just as our architects do: who sometimes build a wooden tower where they may place bells, until they construct their own tower, which they intend, out of bricks: All of which ascribe no small imperfection to the Craftsman. In the same way, those are to be rejected who dream that God fashioned the sun imperfect on the first day: and afterwards on the fourth day gave it the form of light itself. Let these people say, I ask: If the sun on the first day was imperfect, and not endowed with its own light, how did it cause day and night by illuminating the world, as they had said a little above? And if it was first made formless, like matter: why did Moses not say, 'The sun was imperfect,' just as he had said of the earth, 'But the earth was without form and void'? Afterwards, concerning the perfection bestowed, he added: 'Let the earth bring forth green herb.' Let them also note that on the fourth day God said: 'Let there be, or let there exist, two great luminaries:' Nor did He say, 'Let the two luminaries bring forth their light:' as He had commanded the earth a little before: that it should bring forth. These people imagined that God, in the manner of painters, first sketched the figure with a stylus, so that afterwards He might paint it with suitable marks and colors. Indeed, that which mortals seek from imperfect virtue is unfitting for God. But because it is said of matter that it was first formless, and afterwards depicted with its own figures [Augustine.], let this be understood to signify the order of nature, and not of time: so that not only Augustine [Ancient Theologians.], and ancient Theologians agree, but also distinguished Philosophers, and more skilled Poets [Trismegistus. Alcinous.] concur: For Trismegistus, Alcinous the Platonist, and other wise men [Hesiod. Euripides. Ovid. Plato.] say: Hesiod also, Euripides, and Ovid sing that heaven and earth were once mixed, and a certain chaos, afterwards separated, generated individual things: trees, birds, wild beasts, and the race of mortals: Which is most clearly demonstrated by Plato in the Timaeus, and by Philo, most celebrated in both Greek and Hebrew languages: and we are taught to refer that division of days not to time, but to the order of production [Augustine.], and of the things produced. Augustine, however, ascending further, thought that through those days should be interpreted the ordered and perfect knowledge which angelic minds had of the things produced: devising a twofold knowledge in them—

--- Page 207 ---
their sheer ravings and fabrications:
Line 12:
he flew upon the wings of the winds. The same Prophet also [says]: They pierced my hands, and
Line 17:
is metaphorical, and speaking of one thing, it hints at another: as in its proper place, God willing, at least
Line 18:
we will discuss in part. All wise men therefore, who admit the generation of the world:
Line 19:
and whose eyes are illuminated by eternal and unique light, agree in this: that
Line 20:
all things were made simultaneously. But why that distinction is made through six days, and by how great a
Line 21:
mystery, we will somewhat explore.

Cur numerus senarius fabricæ, & septimus dies requiei addictus sit. Ca. XI.
Why the number six was assigned to creation, and the seventh day to rest. Ch. XI.

[Decorative Initial E] And if all the works of the supreme craftsman are said to have been made with great mystery and great sacrament, no less is this true of the number six, by which
t

--- Page 208 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

nothing is superfluous, nor deficient, nor does anything exceed, nor flow out, nor flow in, nor does it need foreign aids: but it is equal and temperate, and relies on its own parts and strengths, and stands firm. And the generating parts render the begotten similar to the begetter: Therefore, when God had produced His work by dividing it into this number, [Marginal note: Moses] Moses said: "Therefore the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them." Hence also Orpheus commands hymns to be ended with the sixth generation: because nothing further can be sung about created things, since all perfection is terminated therein. [Marginal note: August.] Thus Augustine teaches that God perfected His works in six days: in which number he believes a mystery is signified rather than parts of time. Therefore we also need numbers to perceive the sacraments of God and nature, not indeed the numbers of a merchant, but those distinguished by their own numbers. Proceeding further, let us say: that from a triangular figure this number is best suited to the structure: for its base is the ternary, the summit is one, the intermediate are two, as is clear in the figure presented [three dots in a triangle]: For the entire structure emanates from three persons, since their external works are undivided: They also tend towards one end, to which all things are directed: but the transition is through the binary, namely matter: For the first principle of this emanation was matter, which savors of the binary: and it tends to be reduced to one through form, which bears the image of the ternary: just as from every part in the preceding figure the ternary tends towards the monad through the binary: To which, all things being reduced, follows the sabbatical rest of the seventh day, closing and terminating the course of all days. Therefore, the structure is divided by this senary, far more excellent than that which is numbered by the succession of days. If, therefore, it is admitted that God, the supreme craftsman, proceeded to work in His perfect order, the agreement of Catholic wise men with [Marginal note: Plato.] philosophers, especially the Academics, will be easy: Whose Prince (Plato) said in the Timaeus, that God, the propagator of the world, having produced the twin matter of heaven and earth, immediately afterwards produced light, by which things might be distinguished and, being distinguished, might be known: or commanded it to be inherent in things: Therefore it is notably said (as the truth of the letter has it) "let there be light upon the matter," namely, informing it. First, therefore, the matter of heaven and earth is said to have been fabricated simultaneously with light, through which the matter itself would be painted with the image or likeness of the craftsman. And this necessarily was: and it is called the first emanation of the craftsman into the work: and the first illumination, or light seen by the darkened matter, from which, a composite being made simultaneously with light, the first day appeared, completed from the evening of matter and the morning of form. But because the whole influx of divinity was by no means suitable for matter, therefore on the second day Arachiah said that a curtain, or Mass of the heavens, was placed between the super-excellent fount of light and waters, and the darkened matter, and a few waters of goodness, lest the influx of waters and goodness be greater than was suitable for the matter itself: But this is said to have been done on the second day, namely, an inauspicious one. Hence the Hebrews read this separation mournfully, with the accent placed above, which they call Zarco, [placed] on וַיַּרְא (vayyar), as if grieving over the obstacle established between the flowing goodness and the receptive matter: And this as regards the primeval production. But we too must lament concerning this inauspicious day: on which was interposed

--- Page 209 ---
**SECOND TONE.**                                                                    36

There is also between us and God a tribunal balancing how much grace and how much divine influx should be admitted to each. For the fount of divine goodness is most exuberant, from which it would flow more than those receiving might deserve, if there had not been an intervening obstacle preventing it: as ordering justice requires. But on the third day, indeed according to the formal number of things, forms are unfolded, and are said to be separated from the inner and earthly things, therefore it is said: Let the waters that are under the heaven be gathered together unto one place: that is, let the generative forces be collected together, and let the dry land appear: which may be made fruitful by the virtue of those collected forces: as is subjoined: Let the earth bring forth grass, the green herb: and the fruit-bearing tree, and those things which follow. Therefore, the forms having been produced, and the earth depicted, so that those pictures might appear and be seen, in the fourth place it was said: Let there be two great lights in the globe, or mass of the heavens: and let them divide, that is, let them cause to discern between the dark and the light: and let those things be seen, which have been illuminated by their forms: and let them be separated from those things which still lie in their darkness and more obscure figures. But on the fifth vital day, from the fifth character, namely ה signifying life, a full communion of life is described, while it says: Let the waters swarm forth, or produce swarms of living creatures, and the fowl that may fly above the earth, as well as upon the face of the heavens. God also created on the same day great dragons, or great whales, as our translation has it: and every living soul creeping upon the earth: whence God is understood to be the author of all life, both superior and inferior. Great mysteries are here: First, why the waters are said to produce living things and animals, just as their seed is also watery: and why those animals are first said to be produced by the waters, afterwards fashioned by God, insofar as the waters had swarmed forth and produced, and what is the fowl flying above the earth, and upon the face of the heavens. But access is not given here to such intimate sanctuaries: since our purpose is to run through why, and how those works are said to be distinct through five days, and on the sixth day, indeed perfect and vital, from the letter ו signifying six and life, again beasts are introduced, produced in their kind: and man in the most perfect form, with the image, namely, and likeness of God. Also why the seventh is said to be ascribed to rest: so that, namely, rest and the day of the Sabbath may agree: just as their names agree in the mysterious Hebrew language.

**The Agreement of the Ancients on the Unity of Things. Chapter XII.**

**[Decorative initial P]** Evident is the controversy of the Peripatetics with the ancients, Parmenides, [Marginal note: Peripa. Parme.] Melissus, and their followers, concerning the unity of things: Which altercation is indeed verbal: as Simplicius [Marginal note: Simpli.] and other wise men rightly perceive: Into which contention those have entered, who either do not understand, or pretend not to understand, so that they may seize an opportunity for dispute: Whose disputes are easily explained if they admit (as they ought) God as the author, sustainer, and bond of things: Concerning Whom Plato, speaking to Hermias, Erastus, and Coriscus, says: [Marginal note: Plato.] You who are three, ought to read this letter, or at least two of you, and as often as possible: so that you may know God of all things which have been, which are, and which shall be,

E iiij

--- Page 210 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

[Marginal note: Manil.] The Prince: and the Father and Lord of the princely and creative cause. How by philosophizing we will be able to clearly attain the nature of a happy man: namely, by knowing the cause, end, and sustainer of things, or God continuously diffused into us, according to what that wise Astronomer writes: For I will sing of Him who is powerful in mind over silent na-
[Marginal note: Ierem.] ture, and God infused into heaven, earth, and sea. Just as He says through Jeremiah: I fill heaven and earth. Which unless He does: [that is, unless He] vivifies and sustains all things, they will easily be resolved into nothing. Thus therefore, for all things there is one being diffused, in which they are and are preserved. Of which thing we can offer an example even in sensible things: For
[Marginal note: Iamblico Diony. Acade.] the Sun, which (as Iamblichus testifies) is a clear image of divine intelligence, or a clear statue in this mundane temple (as Dionysius, together with the Academics, teach), is unique in essence and light, yet manifold in its rays; just as the first being itself is unique in itself, and that divine, eternal, and immutable [being] is yet manifold, diffused in creatures. And just as when the Sun contracts its rays, all things are darkness, in like manner, when the divine sun turns away its face, all things are disturbed and are reduced to their dust, or to nothing.

[Marginal note: Thales] Thales therefore, contemplating this being, asserts that it is infinite in its origin.
[Marginal note: Parme.] Parmenides, however, thinking of it in its rays, used to say it was finite. Nor
[Marginal note: Ariſtote.] did such great men deny the diversity of rays, as Aristotle imputed to them: For as he himself confesses, Parmenides pos

--- Page 211 ---
TONE TWO.
                                                                                                                                  37
di: To which Albert the Great adds, consenting: Nothing is truly being, unless it is  [Marginal note: Albertus GOD]
His, who said: "I AM has sent me to you." For He is from Himself, and through Himself: other things, however, are
neither from themselves, nor through themselves: but they are only as much as they participate in His being. In this
sense, I believe, the antiquity of the Egyptians conceived: and it was inscribed on Pallas's  [Marginal note: Aegypt.]
peplos: Pallas is whatever was, whatever is, whatever will be, and whatever you
see: whose veil no wise man was ever able to reveal: because that being of hers is infinite,
diffused and enclosed in particular things, by which, as by certain
veils, it is hidden, so that it cannot be grasped: both because it is hidden, and because it is
infinite, and transcends all grasp except its own: For Pallas, who is said to have been born from the
brain of Jove, signifies that wisdom: through which, and in which, all things were made,
according to that prophetic saying: "You have made all things in wisdom." By which also  [Marginal note: David]
all things are filled: as the same prophet continues: "The earth is filled with your possession."
Just as it had recently been said through Jeremiah, and many other wise men agree:  [Marginal

--- Page 212 ---
CANTICLE ONE

Pythag. [marginal] are distributed most harmoniously. And what Pythagoras [describes] through numbers, Plato
Plato [marginal] describes through the great and the small: since everything that exists obtains a greater or lesser degree of essence and perfection, distinguished by even and odd numbers. Or if the discussion is about bodies: each literally has a great, or small, or moderate quantity: which is also terminated and separated by even and odd numbers. Therefore, Plato does not understand matter only through the great and the small:
Idem [marginal] as Aristotle seems to impute to him. Who, as his diligent listener,
Aristo. [marginal] could have well known that Plato called matter an unformed bosom, the potentiality of the mother of the world, the nurse of forms, the subject, the receptacle: and things of this kind are distinguished by no quantity, nor by any degree. Which matter, because it is a certain mass,
Abrahā [marginal] as Abraham teaches in the book 'On Formation', hence Democritus said it was gathered from
Democr. [marginal] atoms, sometimes more densely, and sometimes more rarely. Therefore Empedocles among the prin-
Empedo. [marginal] ciples, placed the dense and the rare. And because continuous and solid things cannot be condensed,
Democr. [marginal] Democritus said that the indivisible atoms themselves are the material principle: Which matter is empty, unless compressed or expanded, it is arranged into a subject capable of producing form: therefore it needed some agent and disposer. But since no disposer of things can be understood before the creation of the world except God, and the author of the universe, therefore we have Democritus agreeing with other wise men: who say that the supreme craftsman produced all composite things from matter: from whom also all forms
Peripat. [marginal] must emanate: whether they are educed from the bosom of matter: as the Peripatetics wish, or whether they emanate immediately from the giver of forms himself: as it pleases other wise men: because he is called the generator and producer who leads form into act, in whatever way that happens. But

--- Page 213 ---
**VOLUME TWO. 33**
**On the general agreement of the Peripatetics, and also of all others in essential matters. Chapter XIV.**

[Large decorative initial S] We establish that the Peripatetics and very many others agree in a pleasant harmony of the wise: This will indeed seem all the more difficult, the more their prince (Aristotle), in order to be considered singular and more excellent, wished to dissent even when not disagreeing with others, especially from Plato, pursuing an opposite process. For there is a twofold process: just as there is a twofold nature: as Plato himself recalls. One is sensible: concerning which there is reasoning based on opinion: which they call science: [Plato] The other, however, is the incorruptible nature of superior substances, immutable, constant, continuous, always the same, which is not perceived by discursive thought: but is seen by the keenness of the mind. This is called divine science: because it deals with divine matters, and is divinely taught. The preceding (science), however, is called daemonic: because it is about earthly things: and because it is suggested by those inferior intelligences: whom Marcus Tullius calls Lares, Apuleius sometimes Lares, sometimes Genii, and others indeed call Daemons: [Tul. Cic. Apul.] who are contained below the lunar orb, busying themselves with the understanding of earthly things. Hence the Greeks, both Peripatetics and Platonists, called Plato himself divine, but Aristotle a daemon: because the former always made it his concern both to deal with divine matters and to learn from those who had received from divine oracles: The latter, however, relying on his own powers, wished to admit only those things which he judged he could prove by his own senses and reasons: For by this path he pursued multiple motions, fourfold qualities, three principles of things, four causes, and suchlike: which are easily apprehended from the senses. Nor does the teacher of sensible things progress further: unless he transgresses (as he himself says) the limits of his sensitive doctrine. Which he also sometimes does, confessing God to be the maker of things: [Aristo.] although, content within sensitive limits, he asserts the world to be unbegotten, and takes away the making of things from God. If, however, we wish to lead him into the assembly of Platonists and divine wise men, this alone seems to me the way. that (just as it sometimes happens with musicians) we observe the former seeking the highest from the lowest: [Idem] but Plato, with John, descending from the highest progenitor to the lowest: [Plato. Ioan.] For the latter, beginning from the Word, says: In the beginning was the Word: and the Word was with God: and the Word was God. Afterwards he descends through the Idea, and the light granted to us, to know divine things, even to the flesh assumed by the Word itself: Such a twofold progression we shall also demonstrate in the discussion concerning divine things with elementary and inferior things: For from God, one arrives at the heavens through the ternary: and one ascends there from the elements through the quaternary: where the converging and combined numbers constitute a duodenary (twelve) through each other: by which number heaven is divided and manifoldly adorned: as we shall explain in its proper place (God willing): Which progression these two principal leaders among philosophers observe. Plato, therefore, following the footsteps of the Pythagoreans and ancient [Plato] wise men, wishing to describe the fabric of the world, began from the Creator through the way of numbers: Concerning which with the greatest difficulty (as

--- Page 214 ---
CANTICLE THE FIRST

(as he himself admits) having found these things, he puts them forth: "He received one portion from the universe in the beginning: the second, however, double the first: and the rest that follow." Aristotle, however (especially in the book *On Physical Hearing*), begins from lower and elementary principles, ascending through various motions to investigate the first mover, God. Plato, in turn, from oracles and from those things which he learned to hunt out from the ancients, lays the foundations of his doctrine from numbers: since numbers are native to divine, terrestrial, and human affairs. It is clear, therefore, that if one wisely leads him (Aristotle) through the ternary of divine things, and this one (Plato) through the quaternary of corporeal and sensible things, arriving at the duodenary common to both, he will make them meet there. And (to speak more clearly) let the Peripatetic way proceed from the elements and the lowest principles of things up to the celestial machine which is seen: and the discussion will be about motion, generation, corruption, alteration, augmentation, diminution, and local motion up to the first mover itself, inasmuch as it exists. But concerning its secrets, concerning the genesis of the world, concerning intelligences, and suchlike, let those who hunt truth through the senses be silent: and let them leave these things to those who have seen them with purified eyes: or who have received them from those who had seen them: or who proceed through the similitude and sacraments of numbers: to whom nothing is more familiar than divine things. In the same way, let them conduct the business of the soul (as far as is right) through their senses, leaving those things that transcend physical limits to divine wise men. And if some dissonance appears among them, let the strings be loosened by the higher teachers: but by the lower ones, let them be tightened, and the sound softened: as is accustomed to happen with instruments: and their harmony will be found. To achieve which harmony, we would apply effort and industry: were it not that the business distracts us too much from our purpose: which is to reconcile not only the wise, but all things contained in this machine.

[Decorative initial Q containing a seated figure] By what consonant number the supreme artificer descends into all created things. Third Tone.
How one is extended through twenty-seven. Chapter I.
With what order the progression from the triune God through the ternary is made into all created things. Chapter II.
How Angels are distributed through the first novenary corresponding to the simple ternary. Chapter III.
Just as God descends into us through the threefold order of Angels, so through them we can ascend to God. Chapter IIII.
Concerning the Author of Intelligences. Chapter V.
How the Artificer fabricated the heavens by the second squared ternary. Chapter VI.
How Planets or stars operate good or evil in lower things. Chapter VII.
Whence evils arise, whether from the malice of the influent, or from the bad disposition of the recipient. Chapter VIII.
Things which have already been decreed by the opinions of the wise are proven by reasons. Chapter IX.
That neither Saturn, nor Mars, nor any other star is evil, as was asserted. Chapter X.
Whether stars act upon us or not: and if they do act, whether by compelling or by disposing. Chapter XI.
How the Artificer of all things produced all elementary things by the third squared ternary. Chapter XII.
Why the elements are distributed by the number four. Chapter XIII.
That elements are found in all mundane members. Chapter XIIII.
Concerning another division of elementary things, by which many objections that could be made concerning the aforesaid are removed. Chapter XV.
That elements are found not only in this terrestrial world, but also in the celestial, supercelestial, and Archetypal. Chapter XVI.
Concerning the figure of the elements according to the Pythagoreans and Platonists. Chapter XVII.

--- Page 215 ---
**SECOND TONE. 39**
**HOW ONE IS EXTENDED THROUGH TWENTY-SEVEN. Chapter One.**

**M**ONAD diffused into multitude is clear to all wise men: But how the nature of unity may agree with multitude, and without discrepancy may cohabit in it, this labor must be undertaken by us here. Nor can it agree in any other way, except through the harmony of unity: which is found in multitude. Hence Plato, imitating Timaeus of Locri, describes the fabric of the soul and the world through the accepted monad: and through doubled, tripled, and quadrupled proportions he arrives at twenty-seven, namely the cube of the first number, adding that all intervals were filled. **[Marginal note: Plato]** So that his interpreters Proclus, Chalcidius, and later thinkers may do this, they place the senary, the first perfect number, in the place of unity: **[Marginal note: Procul. Chalcid.]** which, by doubling and tripling in the same order, they reach 162: And then they fill the intervals with diapentic and diatessaronic harmony, also with a tone, semitone, and leimma: so that the whole soul and the whole world may be harmonic: and may contain all divine harmony: For the first and highest monad is diffused into the first number, namely the ternary: which, if squared, completes the novenary: By which number the orders of separate intellects, the heavens, and all elemental things are distributed with the highest harmony: as we intend to demonstrate below: Which number, if reduced to a cube, yields those twenty-seven mentioned above: But before these harmonic degrees of things are distributed, the prime matter (which poets call Chaos, the Greeks Hyle, and the Hebrews תהו, that is Hiuili or Tohu) was pre-required: which was not counted among the numbered things: just as the prime agent and the highest monad does not enter into the number of others: although through its unity it enables all to be numbered. Hence, most wisely, Moses, before the fabric of things, prefaced the production of matter, saying: **[Marginal note: Moses]** "In the beginning God created heaven and earth," namely the matter of both: which were afterwards formed: For he gave form to the former on the second day, when he said: "Let there be an *arachiba* in the midst of the waters," that is, the extended or expanded thing of all heavens: Whence it follows: "and he called the *arachiba* heavens." For *arachiba* is not the firmament, as our translation has it: but the globe and mass of all heavens: Which is proven by that which follows: "God made two great lights, and the stars: and he placed them in the *arachiba*:" For those lights were not placed in the firmament, that is, the starry heaven: but each one in its own orb: from which it is concluded that *arachiba* signifies something gathered together from all the orbs. But he gave form to the earth on the third day, in that he said: "Let the waters which are under the heaven be gathered together into one place: and let the dry land appear:" which dry land he called earth: So that he might express this more clearly, he had said above: "But the earth was *tohu*," which is explained as chaos, or a certain rude mass, or matter. There follows ובוהו *vabohu*, the meaning of which is, "And in which that which was to be formed was present:" For in matter all things (as is common-

--- Page 216 ---
FIRST CANTICLE

(as is common) they pre-exist in potential before they are unfolded into their proper forms. Therefore, intermediate
genera are completed by the twenty-seventh number: among which genera there are many
intervals, to be completed by harmonic numbers of the second genera and species, or by
degrees: and in the latitude of species, individual things are placed in the same order and with their own
harmony. For the species itself has a certain latitude, although it is compared to number,
which seems to have no latitude. If, however, it is more diligently
examined, unity is divided when the tone, which is generated from the excess of unity,
namely of nine to eight, is divided into a semitone: and that (semitone) is divided into a lemma,
namely half of a semitone, by changing smaller numbers into larger ones. Namely, eight into
16 and 32, and indeed into 18 and 36, which is commonly held among musicians. Therefore,
natural number, which is the proportion of things, is divided, although a vocal sound is not divided, unless
reduced to a higher number. For so much does man differ from man, and horse

--- Page 217 ---
TONE THREE. 40

having been raised to that divine abode, where the forms and exemplars of things, with elegant sweetness,
respond in a single sound in the same single word, they clearly perceived that harmony:
Which, diffused into so many varied parts of the mundane instrument, we, weighed down by this coarser flesh,
cannot perceive: unless, by taking up now one, now another measure, we gather them all in our mind:
where we may perceive that harmonic agreement of created things with each other, and with the Creator, with some sweetness:
whence we may be raised to the most perfect hymns with the morning stars: and at the same time, with those
citizens, to resound with full voice in praise of the Creator. For only (says Plato) [Marginal note: Plato.]
the thought of the philosopher, or of the true wise man, recovers the wings let down through the coarser mass of the body:
by which, flying to supercelestial realms through these mundane and celestial things, it perceives their measures in some way:
until that which is perfect comes: to which that which is in part may yield.
Therefore, we shall propose the harmony of three Enneads: from which, ascending by ordered steps from one to another,
we may arrive at the fertile Archetype of all consonance.

With what order the progression from the triune God through the ternary occurs into all created things. Chapter II.

[Large decorative initial P] YTHAGORAS, the Father of Philosophers, and the most diligent investigator of natural order and harmony, [Marginal note: Pythag.]
who had no predecessor in natural philosophy, and saw no equal, [Marginal note: Chaldæi]
not only drew his doctrine from the Chaldeans and [Marginal note: Assyrii]
Assyrians, but, imbued with the more hidden wisdom of the Hebrews, attributed
so much to the ternary number (as we have from his followers) that he asserted every principle
of Divinity, and consequently the universe, is perfected by the ternary: For every number
grows by a threefold increase, namely, in length, breadth, and depth,
beyond which no further progression is given. Moreover, perfect dimension in a body
is completed by the same threefold increase, and by a threefold intersection at a right angle. Nor indeed
can more right angles be caused in any figure, although very many obtuse and acute ones can.
Therefore, the production of numbers and continuous quantity is threefold: For if a number
is added to unity, it becomes linear: And if a point is extended in length, it constitutes a line.
But if a number grows in breadth, it becomes superficial: and if breadth is added to a line,
it is changed into a surface. If again a number is led into depth, it becomes corporeal,
solid, and a cube. And if depth is joined to breadth, a body is constituted.
But to a three-dimensional body, and to a cube number, nothing can be added, as all Pythagorean
philosophers and mathematicians teach. Hence Aristotle celebrates this number [Marginal note: Pythag. Mathe. Arifto.]
at the beginning of his discourses on the heavens: saying, "We have the ternary number
from nature: and we uphold it as a law, according to which, namely, all things are ordered."
Hence, according to the same number, we are bound to magnify God, the maker
and creator of all things. All spiritual and corporeal things also consist of three,
namely, beginning, middle, and end: which trinity they draw from that most
excellent ternary: from whom are all things, in whom are all things, and through whom are all things: as Paul
teaches. Moreover, by three (as Trismegistus says) the world is perfected: fate (himarmene), necessity, [Marginal note: Paulus Trifme.]

--- Page 218 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

-sity, and order: which are, the convergence of causes with each other, execution or generation,
[Marginal note: The Sage] and the due distribution of what is generated: Also by three (as the Sage says) God disposed the world, by number, weight, and measure: By which all things bear the trace of the super-excellent trinity: For it has number from that highest unity, and the source of all numbers: Weight from that wisdom, which balances all things: Measure from that arti-
[Marginal note: Magi] ficer's spirit, who distributes a fitting portion to each. Hence the Magi believed three principles to be over the world,
[Marginal note: Plato] Oromas, Mithras, and Ariman, that is, God, Mind, and Soul. For the property of the most high God is unity: Of Mind or wisdom, order, or weight: But of Soul, or spirit, measure, and motion. Which Plato conveyed through enigmas to King Dionysius, when he says: "All things are around the King of all, all things are by his grace, he himself is the cause of all beautiful things." For all things are connected around the King by his unity: and by his grace all things are weighed: and all things are ordered towards him: and he, by numbering and proportioning all things, is the cause of all beautiful things, both efficient and final, and ruling, and sustaining,
[Marginal note: Orph. Plato.] namely,

--- Page 219 ---
**TONUS TERTIUS. 41**

How Angels are distributed through our ninefold system corresponding to the simple ternary. Chapter III.

[Large initial N] That there are nine orders, or grades, of Angels among Dionysius, Iamblichus, and more recent Theologians is most accurate: And they are completed by the ninefold number (not indeed simple, but in some way composite): Because they themselves, separated from the most simple intellect (whence they are called "separated intellects" by philosophers as well as by Hebrew sages), admit some composition: because in them is essence and the virtue perfecting them; or (as they say) Metaphysical matter and form. For neither, receding from pure act, are they entirely stripped of matter: since it is evident in the breadth of things that whatever recedes from pure act necessarily inclines towards matter. Whence Dionysius, the principal doctor concerning Angels, asserts that they are unmixed, namely with matter. But because in them there are degrees of perfection, those nearer to God are distributed into the first ternary, bearing a more express image of the simple ternary: And the subsequent ones by a doubled ternary: And the last ones are concluded by a tripled ternary. Therefore, the first ones, rejoicing in a more express image of the triune God, represent that diffusion of the supreme monad into a trinity: For God and Father of all, having His essence presented to His intellect (which is called "fecund memory" by Theologians), by understanding Himself, generates wisdom, or the Word, or knowledge of Himself, which is called the Son. Hence it acquires the name of Son of the Father: For the wisdom produced, since it is most similar to the producer and emanating from Him by natural progression, obtains the name of Son. But love, springing forth from the knowledge of both (who are the supreme good), is named the Spirit and the bond of both: To this love, connecting parent with offspring, the Seraphic order corresponds. But the Cherubic (order), full of wisdom and beauty, corresponds to supreme wisdom and to the Son, who is the Father's delight and the beauty of all things. But the Thrones themselves serve the Father, in whom, sitting, He glories in the continuous production of the Word and the Spirit: In whom also He judges the world, as is read in the psalm: "He has prepared His throne for judgment." To whom also He calls the Son, bestowing upon Him all-encompassing power of judging, as He Himself testifies in the Apocalypse, saying: "I have conquered, and I sit on the throne of my Father." But since the supreme good easily diffuses itself into others, hence He also produced another threefold order, by which it would relate to producing and governing creatures: To these orders and ministers, as a magnificent craftsman and prince, He decreed to work and to rule. But one thing must be guarded against here: that God (as Augustine and the entire school of Theologians agree on this point) always operates as triune and undivided externally: so that none of the persons ever operates without the others: Which is also proven by examples: "we have," says Origen, "from the Father, that we exist; From the Son, or the Word, the communion of reason or order; But life from the spirit of life, who presides over mundane and supercelestial wheels." Because therefore God the Father gives to all that they exist, He is deservedly called Lord of all: concerning whom it is read in sacred scripture: Lo-

F

--- Page 220 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...You are Lord of all things. Hence, the order of Dominions corresponds to Him. And because He pre-
[Marginal note: Matth.] sides with due order and power, which He bestowed upon the Son, who said: "All power is given unto me in heaven, and in earth." Powers are named, who execute those things over which it has been given to the Son to preside. And because He gives life, steadfastness, and holiness to all rightly ordered things through the spirit of holiness and life, another order was required, namely that of Virtues, through which all things might be led to true life and holiness. And this is what the Psalmist sings: "By the spirit of his mouth is all their strength." And because the Triune God communicates Himself in a threefold manner and in a threefold order, therefore He took care to govern all created things (especially man, for whose sake all things were made, and in whom all things are contained) by a threefold degree. For He distinguished the human race by superior and inferior ranks, and He divided and distributed kingdoms and provinces, over which He commanded some to be set in spiritual governance, and others in civil governance. Over these provinces and kingdoms He set the order of Principalities; Archangels, moreover, over princes and prelates; and indeed, He assigned one Angel to each individual man,
[Marginal note: Hieron.] as Jerome rightly understands concerning that saying of the Supreme Prince: "Their angels always behold the face of my Father who is in heaven."
       Just as God descends to us through the threefold order of Angels, so we can ascend to God through them.

Chapter IIII.
[Marginal note: Diony.] [Decorative initial N containing figures of people in a landscape] It is very well known in Dionysius that not only inferior intelligences, but also we ourselves, are enlightened, purified, and perfected by superior beings. If we assent to these things, we easily ascend to the rank and order of Angels, which is nearer to us; from which, by acting rightly and being purified, we are deservedly preferred to others, and Archangels, that is, Angelic princes, have care over us. Among these prelates and subjects, Principalities intervene, so that they subject the former and elevate the latter by a certain hidden power. And neither of them perceives it, yet the subject feels a certain yoke of the one presiding, from which he cannot easily free himself; indeed, he fears and reveres that power which Principalities infuse into prelates, just as they themselves draw it from the terrifying seat of divine majesty, which, situated in the north, binds all minds, both angelic and human, under the yoke of servitude with terrifying and fiery laws. The transgression of which is the evil of guilt, and
[Marginal note: Ieremias] punishment is the evil of penalty, as Jeremiah, subject to the divine spirit, prophesies: "From the north every evil shall break forth." Hence that murderer, who did not stand in the truth from the beginning, burst forth with stubborn arrogance, saying: "I will place my seat in the north, and I will be like the Most High," namely, the prince of the evil and confused forest, just as that one rules in the kingdom of peace and quiet. Hence the prince of the world, that is, of things separated from God, is often named by the true prince, as in the Gospel, whose title
[Marginal note: Ioan.] is according to John: "The prince of this world comes," he says, "and has nothing in me." And again he said, when he spoke of the triumph he was about to achieve over him: "Now shall the prince of this world be cast out." And to the same northern part, mortals, when they transgress the law, betake themselves, so that from there they may bring back

--- Page 221 ---
**VOLUME THREE.** **41**

the punishment of their transgression: where the terrifying sons of Elohim, that is, of God the just judge, severely judge, and execute judgment most sharply, so that they may strike that fear of God into demons and men, which the Hebrews call *pahad* (פחד). [Marginal note: Iahacob] Concerning which Jacob, the master of these sacraments, speaking with his father-in-law Laban the Aramean, said: "Unless the God of my father Abraham, and the fear of my father Isaac, had been with me, perhaps you would have sent me away naked." And again: [Marginal note: Idem] Jacob swore by the fear of his father Isaac: To whom God had granted power from that tribunal of strength and justice, just as to father Abraham from the south of mercy and piety: Adorned with whose symbol, Jacob sits in the midst of the throne of glory. From the north, therefore, all evil, both of transgression and of punishing justice, proceeds with severity and a certain terror, by which inferiors may be led into fear of their superiors. Is not a prince a man similar to other men? How would others fear and revere him, unless divine terror elevated him, and striking fear into others, suppressed them, so that they might revere him as their prince? All of which the supreme prince executes through these principalities. Moreover, all presidency is considered exceedingly deformed, unless there is an adornment and grace in the president, by which he may deservedly be considered a prince of others. Therefore, the ministry of superiors is also necessary for the president, by which impediments, namely vices and the pleasures of the corporeal world, may be shaken off. And the order of virtues achieves this: By whose favor, with constancy and strength acquired, we are made strong against vices and effeminating pleasures. But so that we may also prevail against these aerial powers full of envy and malice, the protection of powers is also necessary for us: so that we may say with [Marginal note: Eliseus] Elisha: "There are more with us than against us." Lest we also be hindered by worldly affections, but that it may dominate all of them, intelligences assist with their virtue, which are called Dominions: By whose favor we may be able to reduce the body to servitude, and to subdue the earth, according to the Imperial decree, which says: "Fill the earth and subdue it." Therefore, having obtained dominion over all inferiors, it remains that, turning to God, we devote ourselves to Him alone: Which can be done if we retain the memory of supercelestial things through the aid of the Thrones, and contemplate them with Cherubic illumination, and, fused by Seraphic ardor, unite with the supreme kinsman and parent: Whence, just as the supreme creator descends to us by His power and influx through the angelic ranks, so also through the same ranks may we return to Him from whom we proceeded. Nor shall I omit those things which Augustine discusses concerning this return to God by the same steps. And first he enumerates four affections, namely fear, sorrow, joy, and hope: which he believed to proceed from the irascible and concupiscible parts (of the soul): to which he adds sense, imagination, reason, intellect, and intelligence, adapting this ninefold division to the nine orders of Angels, he attempts to lead the whole man to God: although he leaves this to the prudent reader to complete: yet, as we can gather from the same, he assigns the senses to the Angels, who are called messengers: just as the bodily senses themselves are messengers.
F ij

--- Page 222 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

He assigns to Archangels the intellect of the inner virtues, namely, of reason, and the imagination of the soul's senses, which perceives more than the senses. To Virtues, fear. To Powers, sorrow. For he who, strengthened by inner virtue through fear of vices and grieving over sins, can, with the Powers, put demons to flight, and with the Virtues, perform miracles. He makes reason correspond to Principalities: just as they preside over spirits, so reason presides over senses and affections. To Dominations, love or joy: for he rightly dominates others who loves all and rejoices in their progress. To Thrones, the intellect, which are called the seats of God. And he attributes intelligence to Cherubim, who are so much more full of perfect knowledge as they contemplate God's majesty more intimately and clearly. For intelligence is a power of the soul which is immediately subject to God. But to Seraphim he equates hope, since they lead into God, who is the hope of all the ends of the earth.

Concerning the Author of the Intelligences. Chapter V.

[Decorative initial O] Pportune I have thought it, before we proceed, to investigate who was

--- Page 223 ---
VOLUME THREE.                                                                    43

And from the same earth which stands forever, with no variation intervening and no cultivation, various effects are produced, namely, herbs, flowers, and those things which are produced by the earth itself, putrefied by solar virtue. And if they say: 'Various effects are brought about by other particular causes working together,' they have left this to be proven, whether this variety proceeds from diverse causes, or from the same sun fertile with multi-faceted power. How much more so: the first and true Sun, about whom Trismegistus [Trisme.], rightly called the father of philosophers, states in these words: My God, existing most full of the fecundity of both sexes, life, and light, by His word begot another creative mind, namely, a son fertile with all ideas and exemplars of things to be made, which pre-existed in Him as the life of all things. For all things (as Mercury [Mercu.] continues) are in God: not indeed as placed in a location, but situated in the mind: from which, producing all things, He is called the parent of all. He alone, freed from the laws of nature, with no subject presupposed and no matter, produced all things, and even matter itself, by His most complete fecundity. But a secondary or natural cause (as they say) requires a subject and matter produced by God, upon which they may act: And in these matters, what the prince of the Peripatetics states holds true: namely, that it is agreeable to the common understanding of the mind that nothing comes from nothing. Hence Augustine [Augusti.], rightly called the father of Latin Theologians, with his entire school, openly asserts that Angels can by no means create nature: And that Angels are no more creators of things than farmers are of crops: Which opinion more recent Theologians, Aegidius Romanus [Aeg. Ro.], Henry of Ghent [Hē. Gā.], Richard [Ricardus], and most vehemently John Scotus [Ioā. Sco.], have striven to fortify, all of which I leave to be read in their books. Here I am struck with the greatest astonishment, because such great men deny that God is the maker of all things; and that nevertheless secondary causes produce from nothing, contrary to the philosophy they profess, in which the more celebrated assert that neither by the supreme maker himself was the world, or anything, produced from nothing. But those who have received the light of truth, profess God alone to be the author of all things. He is the author of the entire world (says Alcinous the Platonist [Alcinous]), of gods and demons: and this universe, by the gift of divine will, will never hereafter be dissolved. Plato [Plato.], moreover, presupposing the highest good to be the cause of separate substances and their duration, thus introduces it addressing them: 'You are indeed not immortal, nor entirely dissoluble: nevertheless, you will not at any time be dissolved: For if all things which have been constituted can be destroyed and dissolved: to dissolve and destroy those things which have been rightly constituted and are in good order, is the mark of a perverse and self-contradictory mind.' Mercury [Mercu.] also, when he spoke of the rulers of the planets, says: 'Then he fashioned seven governors:' and thus enumerates all things produced by God. Nor is it to be thought that in such great harmony of the universe there were many progenitors, and many rulers, and that many things consist of themselves: Because from that would arise confusion, dissonance, and consequently easy dissolution in the universe.

F iij

--- Page 224 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

**How the artisan fabricated the heavens by the second square of three. Chapter VI.**

[Large decorative initial E] By the same number, by the same degrees, the supreme governor distributed the heavens, namely by the second nonary: as the opinion of the ancients and the common opinion holds: although some more recent thinkers assert a tenth, not understanding how the motion, which they call trepidation, is preserved in the eighth sphere without a tenth circle: Nor does it seem consistent to them that the eighth sphere itself, which revolves with three motions, should be annexed to the prime mover: which is driven by only one rotation: For it has a diurnal motion from east to west above the poles of the world: And it has a motion from west to east above the poles of the zodiac, or of the signs, by one degree every hundred years, as pleases [Marginal note: Ptolem.] Ptolemy: But in sixty, as others assert: And it also has that asserted motion of trepidation: whence they believe there is a ninth heaven: which moves only with a double motion between itself and the prime mover: which revolves with only a single motion: so that all things may be reduced in due order to the prime mover: which, by revolving with a single motion, carries all other things with it in a regular and ordered circuit: And that which [Marginal note: Aristo.] Aristotle teaches in his higher philosophy may be preserved, namely that it is necessary for all things to be reduced in due order to that which is their cause.

But since eight orbs are observed: and are proven distinct by armillary spheres and other instruments: and that beyond these there is a ninth (which [Marginal note: Astron.] astronomers call the prime mover, but others, for some reason I know not, call crystalline) manifest reason concludes. These we admit: But a tenth, since it has nothing for itself, except that that asserted motion of trepidation may be preserved, we do not admit: since it can be preserved in another way. Indeed, all the motions of the eighth sphere itself are preserved (as I have observed with an instrument, and confirmed by very clear experience) under that ninth circle without a tenth. [Marginal note: Ptolem. Hermes Aratus] Nor would this tenth orb have escaped Ptolemy, Hermes, Aratus, and other most diligent ancient investigators of the heavens, and their motions, and aspects: who are content with the number nine.

But because Theologians assert a tenth, which they call the Empyrean, vital, fiery, and divine: where those are received who have led a more divine life: as [Marginal note: Plato. plotinus] Plato, and his Academics (Plotinus especially in that which he published concerning the world) agree with our theologians: Therefore we say: granted that a tenth is spoken of, yet properly it is by no means numbered with these nine: Because these are mobile, but that is stable: These are from one material, that from another: [Marginal note: Moses.] Which we can easily learn from Moses, easily the chief of all philosophers, theologians, and prophets, indeed from the true Artisan himself: Where, being asked by Moses to dwell with him: and to instruct him with continuous oracles: which were sought for leading a very numerous people, and for delivering the law: "I will come," he said, "but make for me a wooden ark: which indeed bears the type of the world in which I dwell: Which you shall complete with a cubit and a half, namely nine palms: For a cubit contains six palms: and half a cubit three palms: By which he would represent the nine heavens." But the tenth, namely the covering, he commanded to be made of gold, a material indeed very distant from wood: Which tenth is not fully numbered with those nine—

--- Page 225 ---
**TONE THREE. 44**

...is not fully counted with those nine: but it is the principle of another combination: For the denarius (number ten), although it completes the first numbers, is nevertheless the principle of tens; just as the centenarius (number one hundred) completes the tens, and is the beginning of thousands. So also that covering (which they call the propitiatory), terminating the ark, provided the principle of a better thing: For upon it sat the cherubim, whence propitiations were had. But in the ark, the law, manna, and the rod stood hidden in deep mystery. In like manner also the empyrean heaven, although it completes the number of nine heavens, is nevertheless the principle of spiritual and divine things, redolent of angelic and divine nature, so that it may be proportionate to those things placed there. So also all tenths, having I know not what divine quality, are demanded by God as His own, together with the firstfruits: so that the principle of numbers, or the beginnings and ends of things, or the tenths, may be rendered to Him who is the beginning and end of all things. But we, intending to treat of separate natures, and of those things which, counted together, agree with each other, will omit those things which, as their perfection, connected with a more perfect one, lead lower things into that perfect one. Concerning which union of any ennead into its tenth, we will (God favoring) discuss the perfect harmony of those enneads.

There are therefore nine heavens: the Primum Mobile, through which the prime mover moves all things; afterwards, the heaven of the stars, through which the Creator diffuses Himself into numerous instruments for the effecting of things; and He executes through seven principal ministers, upon whom sit those seven principal spirits, or intelligences: Who, existing before the throne of God, enjoy His presence, and contemplating all things to be accomplished in that divine face as in a mirror, they execute all the same things at the nod of the prince. Their names (if we believe the Hebrew doctors) are these: Zaphchiel presides over Saturn; Zadchiel over Jupiter; Camael over Mars; Raphael over the Sun; Honiel over Venus; Michael over Mercury; and Gabriel over the Moon. Who, through the heavens as through instruments, having accumulated the influences of all stars and signs, operate in these lower things, concurring in the production of metals, stones, plants, and animals: But especially in all things that are in man, and pertain to him, whether they appear good or evil: But how they operate evil or good, I think should be somewhat examined.

**How planets or stars operate good or evil in lower things. Chapter VII.**

**S**tars influence good and evil, both Ptolemy and all who deal with astrological matters assert. Through Saturn is given firm and unshaken prudence: From Jupiter, upright justice: From Mars, constant strength and fortitude: From the Sun, fervent charity and love: From Venus, delightful and sweetest hope: From Mercury, penetrating faith: From the Moon (which is most facile in motion, and in nothing persistent), moderate temperance. Nor do these planets influence the above-mentioned things as sources or masters of these virtues: but by disposing the body and its powers, they easily lead to the increase of the aforesaid virtues: provided that the soul, by moderating those powers, disposes them to achieve
F iiij

--- Page 226 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

those things which the giver of all good things decrees to flow in through his ministers or instruments. From Saturn again, as from a more weighty and sublime patron, we are drawn to more secret things, namely theological and divine matters, a more secret philosophy, the hidden things of both natures; and we are led by a certain disposition to the accumulation of all things to be gathered, both temporal and divine, without which no one is truly great. For what will a scholar be, unless he has gathered many opinions? What will an Emperor be, unless he has amassed money, troops, friendships, and virtues, by which he may deservedly be placed in charge? What will a Saint be, unless he is crowded with merits and manifold graces? Through Jupiter, led by due temperament, we establish and observe the law; we provide what is just; we govern subjects with due authority in peaceful order and tranquil quiet, lest we be worse than bees, cranes, camels, goats, and other such creatures, which recognize their leader. From Mars we have strength and impetus to accomplish work, so that we may be fortunate in our works. For [Aristotle] the cause of fortune is the impetus of nature, if Aristotle thinks correctly, where he wrote about good and bad fortune. Venus provides charm, festivity, and love, by which agitated, we may accomplish whatever arduous tasks with delight, because delight perfects the work. For we could not endure labor in investigating natural and divine things, unless love were present. By which refreshed, we suppress the affliction that constant thought brings. Nor would a merchant

--- Page 227 ---
TOMVS TERTIVS. 45

...we have sufficiently revealed. The influences of the spheres harm those who are badly disposed, from whom the divine, which was in them, has departed. But with that (divine presence) standing, all influences turn to good, which we will explain still more clearly.

Whence evils arise, whether from the malice of influences, or from the bad disposition of the recipient. Chapter VIII.

[Decorative initial V] Since the supreme craftsman saw all things which he had made were very good, not without admiration and prostration of spirit do we hear of so many evils, which some assert concerning the stars, ministers of the best God, decreeing planets (which they call malevolent) to be rather wicked than celestial: namely, that Saturn devours all his children, four excepted; that, troubled by some misfortune, he is voracious, tenacious, difficult, inducing exile, dangers, deceit, wickedness, treachery, moreover, violence, captivity, damnation, perfidy, stubbornness, anger, hatred of all good, fear, distress, sorrow, funerals, mourning, bereavement: Likewise, that he causes witchcraft, thefts, undertakers, embalmers, and magicians.

And concerning the signification of Mars, that Firmicus Maternus, with his ready eloquence, presents these things [Marginal note: Firmicus]: which are treachery, battle, slaughter, audacity, rashness, arrogance, sedition, controversy, plunder, ambushes, robberies, wounds, captivities, flights, difficulties of perfidy, obscenity, incautious love, easy offense, varied thought, no counsel, violent princes, fierce, inhuman, always desiring the slaughter of others, perjured, deceitful, inconstant, slanderous, disordered, contaminating all things, polluting all things: It also signifies the deformed, the shameless, pernicious to childbirth, abortion of children: And in whatever part of the sky it is, it always threatens some evil: If in Aries, it makes thieves, clamorous people, fraudsters: In Taurus, audacious, rash, slanderers, for whom right and wrong are just, provided they satisfy their own lust: In Gemini, devoted to malice, and seeking out hidden crimes with vigilant sagacity: And so he continues concerning other signs. In like manner also concerning the houses: so if it is in the ascendant (horoscope), it makes cunning, audacious, furious, squanderers of patrimony: If in the subsequent house, it still decrees the greatest evils, great misfortunes, estranged from parents, and always strangers from their own home, wounds, chains: And wherever it may be, they always slander him with tireless speech: To this is corroborated what Ptolemy had said before: after whom Alcabitium and Albumasar [Marginal note: Ptolem: Alcabi. Albu.]: Of whom one asserts: that even without evil radiation, it perpetrates malevolent oppressions, shedding of blood, and many crimes: But the other follows with such slanders: which he cannot explain in a few words. I omit what the mathematicians and poets assert concerning Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and the Moon: Namely, that Jupiter and Mars meet in a base and shameful embrace: and perpetrate many unspeakable acts: Especially in the conjunction of Mars with Saturn, Phaethon, Stilbon, Phosphorus, or the Moon: with any of which something evil is always threatened, namely, clashes of iron with the first, of bronze with the second, of gold coins with the third: And so he continues concerning others. O good God, what have you done? How are all things good, which you have made? Why have you placed such evil rulers over us? Who is safe

F v.

--- Page 228 ---
CANTICLE ONE

...will escape so many crimes? Who is immune from celestial ministers, or rather, wicked ones?
Nor is it wonderful, if those who profess knowledge of these things predict so many evils to follow daily in the world: since the heavens, stars, or presiding Angels seem to lead us to commit them. But those who are not dabblers, but lovers of true wisdom (August.) think entirely differently: "From the ears of all (says Augustine) such follies must be repelled: not only of those who hold the true religion, but also of those who wish to be worshippers of any gods whatsoever: For what else does this opinion do, but that no God should be worshipped or adored?" Indeed, they do great injury to heaven: when they suppose that crimes are decreed to be committed there, as if in a most illustrious senate and a most splendid court (Orige, Hiero. Ambrof. August.). I could also cite Origen, Jerome, Ambrose, and very many of our own [authors] who agree with Augustine: But since Christian authority carries less weight with the superstitious, let us come to external [authors]: indeed, to those who were the foremost in handing down the precepts of these prognostications: and we will prove that they themselves handed down their doctrines differently than the common people and the crowd of dabblers imagine.

Let Ptolemy's (Ptolem.) text be read at the beginning of the Apotelesmatics: who is deservedly preferred in such matters and others: and it will be seen what he attributes to the stars, what to birth, what to the parents' seed, what to food, what to place, and what to customs. "The born (he says) greatly imitates the seed and blood of the parents: as is obvious." He also attributes much to place (Porphy. Ptolem.): "which is the principle of generation," says Porphyry, "just as the father is." Hence, even if Jupiter or Venus signify [it] (Ptolemy continues), one born in Ethiopia will not be white, the region and place being an impediment. Customs and food are added (Hali.): "because very often (says Hali, his interpreter) those born are drawn to the nature of customs and foods." Therefore, little is left to the stars: Which did not escape him (Virgilius) who said: "Few, whom righteous Jupiter loved, or ardent virtue raised to the heavens. Those born of gods were able." By which words he implies that not only the stars, but also birth and customs elevate men to sublime things: From which the prince of Astronomers (Ptolem.) himself concludes: "Just as we praise physicians who inquire into the origin of infirmity and its many kinds of causes, in the same way we ought not to be held up to ridicule if, in judging one born, we seek [information] from region, birthplace, foods, customs, and other circumstances:" And in that book, which is called Alarba, he concludes that these accidents very often occur in the born, so that he cannot receive celestial influence: sometimes indeed little, and sometimes much, which very many are ignorant of. Hence in the volume of Apotelesmatics he complains about many: who, not having a complete cause for prognostication in the stars, take [it] from another source, namely necromancy and geomancy (as his interpreter explains), from which they divine, leading men into sophistry and error, when they wish to predict things which a mortal cannot perceive: because nothing certain, but only opinion from many dissimilar things, can be gathered in this art. And when they wish to assert something with certain knowledge, they make that doctrine abominable, which is good and useful. These things, scattered, [says] the Leader of Astronomers. But I will say more: that if all things were disposed by the ruling heaven: they would certainly be very good, moderated by good causes.

--- Page 229 ---
**THIRD TONE. 46**

Hermes Trismegistus, called not only supreme in kingship, priesthood, and doctrine, but [Mercu.]
also in philosophy, Metaphysics, and Theology, left behind in the Memphitic
columns (as Iamblichus recounts at length in series) that all astral influences [Iambli.]
are good: But if evil follows, he commands it to be ascribed to the indisposed subject,
not to the stars: demonstrating with the example of sunlight, which is certainly good:
But if it offends a bleary eye, that happens from the bad disposition of the recipient:
To which Plato in Epimenides assents with these words: [Plato]
God made the moon waxing and waning: and established months for the year:
and taught that all their number is brought into numerical harmony by a certain happy fortune.
Hence the earth, made more fertile, conceives and bears fruit for the nourishment
of all animals, when both the winds blow gently and the rains happily flow into
the bosom of the earth. But if any evil happens in these things, not the divine
and celestial nature is to be blamed: but human nature, which unjustly distributes
its life: thus far Plato. Hierocles the Stoic also exclaims in the verses of Pythagoras, [Hieroc.]
saying: That each person is evil, he himself is the cause of his own malice.
Nor do the impurities of an unjust mind emanate from the purest higher sources.
Plato also in the sixth book of the Laws: [Plato.]
from whom Aristotle, likewise excerpting in his Politics, states:
that a human being, having attained proper discipline, becomes the most divine
and gentle animal: But if he has not been educated sufficiently, or less well,
he becomes the fiercest of all animals born on earth. And Chrysippus. [Chrysip.]
He certainly attributed the cause of their misfortunes to madness, and again:
How falsely mortals accuse the gods above, and foolishly complain:
For indeed, we ourselves are the cause of our evils:
And his own folly harms each one.
        What has already been decreed by the opinions of the wise is proven by reasons.
                Chap. IX.
[E] T if, with the wise bearing witness, some believe all good influences less than
they ought: unless they are worthy of hellebore, they will yield to the irrefutable
reasons which we shall bring forth. Let them say, I ask, those who bring forth
evil influences, whence this malice? Is it from God commanding, or from a moving
intelligence, or from the revolving heaven? Certainly not from God: who is the first
rule of all things: And evil, or sin, is that which is done against the will of the ruler:
or by deviating from its balance: Nor can evil in nature proceed from the source of
goodness. Hence against those who cast blame upon God, the psalmist sings: [Psalm.]
For evils have turned aside to you, they have devised counsels which they could not
establish, because it is too foolish and absurd even to imagine that evils proceed
from the best God: and transgression of the law from the supreme moderator:
since His will is His very law. Nor let it be said: God always concurs in motion:
consequently in the effect proceeding therefrom. But the effect is often evil, whether
due to the cause of the influencer or the recipient, and eventually God concurs in evil:
But grant that as the first and universal cause, He concurs in influencing towards evil,
He does not cooperate in

--- Page 230 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

deformity, but to the underlying act: as they say: in which the secondary cause inducing deformity is to be blamed. For it is commonly held that when multiple causes concur to the same effect, the effect itself always follows the weaker and worse cause; which if it were to agree with the supreme (cause), a good effect would always follow. Hence, not the primary, but the secondary cause is to be blamed. There are also those who presume to blame the presiding intelligence. But let such people say: does this intelligence itself do this by the command of the supreme prince, whom all confess to be the sole moderator of the universe, or against his mind and command? If they accomplish something by his command, it is certainly not evil; because nothing is evil unless it is perpetrated against the order of the supreme moderator. But if, opposing the prince, they do it: then indeed there is great confusion in the supreme ruler, if he allows ministers so rebellious and insolent to go unpunished. Nor should they look to evil prelates, who are wayfarers and endowed with their own free will, so that they may merit (reward) by obeying the prince's command, and demerit (punishment) as transgressors, soon to render an account of their stewardship.

Which also happened among the Angels, before they were given stability. Hence, many were punished and expelled from the ministry of God, as not only our most divine Theology teaches, but also the doctrines of the Assyrians, Arabs, Egyptians, and Greeks confirm. [Marginal note: Pherecy.] Pherecydes the Syrian describes the fall of demons, and Ophion, that is, the demonic serpent, as having been the head of the rebellious army. The splendor of the Egyptians, [Marginal note: Trism.] Trismegistus, touched upon the same case, teaching that the fallen Angel and man (as is clear to one who observes well) descended from the diapason of divine harmony into a lower harmony, or dissonance, and became a most wretched servant, indeed an outcast. [Marginal note: Home.] Homer, the chief poet of the Greeks and painter of mysteries, sings of the fall of the first rebel under the name of Atar in his poems. The theology of the Arabs, also emulating the Hebrew, asserts the same. And the demons themselves have often unwillingly confessed their fall.

Therefore, with those having fallen and been excluded, the rest are fortified with such stability that they cannot fall thereafter. But, to speak with the wise and well-initiated, do they not say that all those motions are invariable and removed from error in their continuous revolution? If, therefore, those orbs revolve with such diligence that no error ever occurs, why are they not faithful in the significations and influences of the stars? And if they are obedient and faithful ministers, they will not cause evil, nor will they dispose badly by executing the command of the supreme good. How then do ministers, who never transgress the commands of the ruler himself, lead to transgression against the king? How also do those causes, which never fail, propel towards defect? But if someone contends that they do fail: since the supreme moderator leaves no evil unpunished in the universe, and without coordinating punishment: when will they be punished? Will they cease from motion, or will they be corrected from error? If they cease, how will that motion be perpetual (as they say)? But if, corrected, they desist from error, why are they not corrected quickly? Why is correction deferred? Why does God entrust the perpetual administration of his house for so long to uncorrected, indeed rebellious, ministers? How will it stand?

--- Page 231 ---
VOLUME THREE. 47

perpetuity with error, since error is almost nothing and tends towards nothing? But to those
who wish to blame the heavens themselves for evil, after they cannot accuse God or the
moving intelligence, we will say: If the heavens are evil, whence their evil? Were they
produced evil, or corrupted by evil habits? Or did they fall into evil due to their nature
failing? Indeed, they were not produced evil by the best artificer: Nor were they corrupted
by habits, since they are not endowed with free will: because their movements and
influences are natural and not free, as all assert. But some will say, they are animated,
and their souls can be corrupted: What, I ask, are their souls? Would they not be the
moving intelligences? But since we recently absolved them from blame, let us return to
the heavens. Do the heavens influence as secondary causes, or as instruments? If as
instruments: since they themselves are not moved, nor do they operate except according
to the will of the guiding artificer, therefore the Artificer would be left in blame, which
has already been refuted: But if as secondary causes: since the work is from a living
being, the error will be traced back to their souls, or the intelligences moving them, which
has also been excluded. Let us also add this: that the heavens act either by nature, or by
will: If by nature: since the order of nature itself is from God, therefore deservedly cele-
brated is that Peripatetic saying: In those things which are from nature, we are neither
praised nor bla-
med: Since praise belongs to the one ordering: nor can blame be present in the order of the
highest good. But if they act freely: they do so led by the irascible or concupiscible faculty: If
by the irascible: since some planet always decrees (as they say) impetuous influences,
why is not eternal wrath consumed? Why again is it said to be kindled more in one
house than in another? What does it acquire in its own, or in a foreign house, that would
kindle it to decree evil? How again is that kindled, which they assert to be unalterable?
But if the heavens are led by concupiscence: what advantage, or
utility do they gain for themselves from inferior things? For concupiscence extends only
to such things: And he who desires evil: does so subverted by intoxicating matter: But
since the matter of the heavens is removed from alteration, it does not intoxicate, nor
does it subvert. From what place, then, do they accuse the heavens? They are (they will
say) evil by nature: Whence, I ask, evil in nature? The wise gather these reasons and ori-
gins of evil in nature: Either because the cause cannot moderate the superfluity of matter,
or satisfy if it fails, or dispose properly, and that kind of thing: All of which proceed from
a weaker virtue of the cause. But since the maker of the heavens is of infinite virtue:
how did he fail in his handiwork? Nor did any other failing cause concur: since he him-
self fabricated the heavens without any assistance. If Moses, nay, truth is believed. [Marginal note: Moses;]
What again could resist the artificer, who brought all things into being? Who resisted the
infinite, or can resist? Hence the eloquent prophet Isaiah says: Lord [Marginal note: Isaias]
of hosts has decreed: who can annul it? And his hand is stretched out: who will turn it
back?

--- Page 232 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

**That neither Saturn, nor Mars, nor any other star whatsoever is evil: as was previously stated. Chapter X.**

[Decorative initial A] Let the accusers of the stars hear what the prince of astronomical doctrine [Marginal note: Ptolem.] first states about Saturn in the third book of Apotelesmata. "If Saturn," he says, "should be the sole significator in the state of the soul, and Lord of the place of Mercury and the Moon, and filled with good irradiation at the angles of the world, he will be a lover of good things, of great and firm counsel, a seeker of secret and [Marginal note: Iul. Fir.] divine matters." But Firmicus also, pursuing him with many praises, says: "that his leadership in matters of deliberation is a most keen intellect: certain speech, stable friendship, long foresight, and royal counsel: He also signifies deep understanding and profound knowledge of things." And concerning him, younger authors state: "that while common life is decreed by Jupiter, Saturn claims for himself a separate and divine life." But to those who feign this life, he is more hostile than to others: those whom Jupiter, scorned by them, has abandoned: nor does Saturn acknowledge them as his own: he who loves true solitaries and divine men. Hence the ancients feigned: that Jupiter usurped the kingdom for himself, with Saturn put to flight, namely by those who are hostile to good Saturn. But he lay hidden in Italy: when he began to elevate the intellects of the Italians: Yet he is said to have come from Greece: because sublime and profound speculations reached the Italians from the Greeks. But formerly from the higher and more distant regions of the East, where, according to the Arabs and Persians, the most subtle demons dwell, of long-lived, Saturnian life in those regions, namely those subject to Saturn: But (to speak more truly) sublime speculations were taught by divine ora- [Marginal note: Albu.] cles. Albumasar, perhaps emulating the Arabs, says that in the regions of India subject to Saturn, men are long-lived: and for the most part die of extreme old age: because Saturn harms his own least of all. But the ancient [Marginal note: Ovid.] philosophers and poets sang of Saturn as the best: and that the golden age ran its course under him. But the Sulmonian (Ovid), imitating the Pythagoreans and Platonists, sang these things in verses:
The Golden Age was first sown, which with no avenger
Of its own accord, without law, cultivated faith and righteousness.
And he continues that many good things ran their course under Saturn: and that mortals, freed from his patronage, declined: whence concerning the succeeding course he continues, saying:
After Saturn, sent into gloomy Tartarus,
The world was under Jupiter: and the silver progeny succeeded,
Worse than gold, more precious than yellow bronze.
[Marginal note: Virgilius] To whom another poet assents, singing:
Before Jupiter, no farmers tilled the fields.
And to Pollio, as if auguring something great, he says:
Now the virgin returns, the Saturnian kingdoms return.
[Marginal note: Plato] Nor are the poets to be ridiculed: who through their poetry penetrated to the inmost parts of the mind and nature (Plato being witness): Nor will they sing mere fables, as some suppose:

--- Page 233 ---
**TONVS TERTIVS. 48**

which no old woman would tell to boys and girls. Yet they were called theologians, enclosing profound and secret things in the coverings of fables. Hence it is celebrated by the wise who penetrate to those mysteries. Aristotle corroborates very weighty philosophical points by the testimony of Simonides and Homer. [marginal note: Aristo.] Arcesilaus, the founder of the New Academy, [marginal note: Arche.] attributed so much to Homer that he would never go to bed without first reading something from him. But he also said he would go to his lover at dawn, so that he might have more opportunity for reading. Anaxagoras and our Basil [marginal note: Anaxa.] admire an excellent praise of virtue in Homer's poetry. [marginal note: Basilius / Dantes] That Tuscan man, endowed with all knowledge and of the keenest intellect, prefers Maro (Virgil), the imitator of Homer, as a teacher in all natural and moral philosophy. There are also those who interpret his entire fiction allegorically. Lucretius [marginal note: Lucre.] treats all precepts of philosophy in his poems. Orpheus, [marginal note: Orph. / Ouidius] beyond what human capacity extends, sings of the mysteries of theology and sacred things from sacred writings (as he himself confesses). Ovid also revealed the secrets of Pythagoras in his Metamorphoses; But corrupting with too wanton a progression, he fell somewhat from that dignity. And others deviated, so much so that they perform the office of pimps rather than of prophets and wise men, content merely to weave poisons with the charms of words. Whom Plato [marginal note: Plato.] rightly orders to be expelled from the republic, even if they sing of the deeds of heroes, lest tender minds be corrupted by the depicted wantonness of the heroes themselves, which a stronger age would not be able to wash away. But returning to those ancient philosophical and theological prophets, they attest that Saturn is happy and benevolent. They also wanted to signify Time, which the Greeks call Chronos (aspirated), from Cronus (not aspirated), which signifies Saturn. Through which Time devours all its children, because it consumes all things, except the four elements: from which and into which, although all things are transformed, they themselves remain. Of these elements, the poets called Jupiter fire, Juno air, Neptune water, and Pluto earth. But those evils which some say Saturn decrees arise from his cold and dry quality, by which he seems to favor black bile. From this, the desiring virtue is suffocated and suppressed, and natural

--- Page 234 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

says) Where there is no anger, knowledge does not advance: judgments are not firm: crimes are not suppressed. Therefore, let battles, slaughters, boldness, pride, spoils, captivities, flights, violences, and whatever things of this kind there may be, be exercised against the enemies of the Lord: and this Mars will not be evil; but with Phinehas, son of Eleazar, commended for his zeal, even with David fighting the wars of the Lord, it will be numbered among the saints and friends of God. But if deceit, perjuries, frauds, rashness, furies, evil homicides, thefts, and such things follow: all those things come from there, because the moderation of reason is bent; by which, the gate being opened, the winds of passions rush in, and sweep through everything with a whirlwind. But if under the command of Aeolus, that is, of reason rightly ruling, or (as it is held in the sacred scriptures) if the beasts introduced into the ark stood under the command of Noah: all impulses which arise from Martial ardor would certainly be moderate and good. It is not otherwise to be judged concerning Venus, who is said to lead to shameful cohabitation: For if we rightly moderated the concupiscence fostered by Venus, even with the Sun and Mars ministering fervor, there will be a good and fervent love for God himself, and for one's neighbor. And thus all will prove [Marginal note: Augustine.] that mortals complain falsely about their own nature, or the influence of the stars (as Augustine says); and that sin is so voluntary, that if it is not voluntary, it is not sin. But whence the crookedness of the ill-choosing will arises, and what should be ascribed to the stars, what to matter, what to concupiscence, what to bad morals, or to bad custom, we have decided to declare elsewhere, with God's favor.

Whether stars act upon us or not, and if they act, whether by knowing, or by disposing. Chapter XI.

**C**ontend some, and assert that we acquire nothing from sidereal influences: Whence they reject this dogma about the influence of the stars as absurd and utterly alien to philosophy. They add that the most serious philosophers, whose care and diligence was in scrutinizing the causes of things, borrowing truth (if any there be) from medicine, from mathematicians, from every art and science, yet never use astrological causes. And to prove this, they send us to Favorinus the Academic, Panaetius the Stoic, Carneades, Posidonius, Timaeus, Pythagoras, Aristotle, Plato, Plotinus, Avicenna, Averroes. Let them send, I beg, also to Galen, Hippocrates, Aesculapius, and Apollo: because they will be easily answered. For let them remember that in favor of the dogmas invented by them, they recalled the agrarian precept: by which it is commanded in Deuteronomy [Marginal note: Deuter.]: that no one should reap the entire field, but should leave an untouched portion for the poor, who might take gleanings and sheaves for themselves to relieve hunger. Whence if someone were to attack you saying, Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome, Origen, Damascene, Rabbi Solomon, and both Rabbi Moses, and the other Hebrew, Greek, and Latin doctors have scrutinized the meanings of scripture with the most diligent labor: and what you write they have not touched: therefore, what you have said is not true. What would he conclude against you? Is it not a common saying in schools: that by arguing from a place of negative authority, nothing is inferred. The wise do not condemn those things which you have devised with your keenest intellect—

--- Page 235 ---
**THIRD TONE.**
49
vised, although not touched by others: so neither should anyone be condemned if he investigates causes more deeply than the philosophers you have enumerated have done. I will proceed further. If they are philosophers, they did not want to transcend the limits of philosophy: but they were content to investigate causes in the powers or qualities of inferior bodies, as many of our time do, among whom their theory and practice have declined too much. All the more recondite philosophers whom you praise agree that inferior things, and what are called natural things, draw favor from superior and celestial things, rather by one aspect than another: which is considered beautiful to know; although the Peripatetics, depressed by their sensible things, are content to assign sensible qualities as the cause of all effects. If, however, any effect appears to which a sensible quality cannot [be assigned], they say that it is from a cause unknown to us. And when it happened to speak of superior things, what they knew could be sufficiently clear from those things which their prince teaches in 'Meteorology' about the heat of the sun: 'It arises (he says)'

--- Page 236 ---
**CANTICLE ONE**

(unless we are in Biria) the cunning Mercury will not persuade us that we are not altered by the luminaries: which even common rustics perceive. And other stars produce effects no less known to the wise than the effects of the luminaries are to common people: (Ptolemy) as the Prince of Astronomers wisely said in the beginning of the Apotelesmatics. Yet the influxes of the stars do not produce full effects: since to these same effects concur food, customs, nativity, place, but most especially, the freedom of the soul. (The Same) Hence the same Ptolemy teaches in the same place, and in "Fructus": how some bodily extremity, when offended, can be tempered; and how the freedom of the soul represses the influx, lest we be drawn by bodily inclinations as if by force, like cattle. "The best astrologer," he says, "will be able to prevent much evil that would proceed from the disposition of the stars, when he has foreknown their nature, by forewarning lest it occur; and lest a badly disposed subject receive harm from which it ought to receive benefit, since every celestial influx is good, as we have said." Therefore, do not attribute vicious sadness or superfluous rigidity to Saturn, nor fierce rashness to Mars, nor fraudulent malice to Mercury, nor lustful loves to Venus, nor unstable progress to the Moon: just as a bleary-eyed person ought not to impute calamity to light, nor the burning of temples or houses to fire, nor bad striking to a stone, nor should chains, prisons, and the slaughter of the wicked be attributed to the severity of the judge, but to those who act wickedly: so too, bad effects which follow from the indisposition of the receiving subject ought not to be attributed to the stars. And that we may seek examples from higher things: What is more excellent than the sacrament of sacraments? Yet to those who receive it unworthily and are badly disposed, it becomes for judgment and condemnation. And if it pleases to come to the particular decrees of the stars (if any truth underlies the opinion of the astrologers): Saturn disposes the intellectual virtue; Saturn is dedicated to prudence and the contemplation of divine and human things, and penetrates even to the splendor of true philosophy. But if a profound intellect directs itself to evil, and to satisfy its own lust, entirely applies itself to frauds, deceptions, simulations, with the superior and divine (which they call synderesis) resisting: then, filled with black bile, it feels anxiety and weariness, by which it is so oppressed that it renders good and profitable things into harmful ones. To one thus oppressed, many delusions occur: namely, apparitions of the dead, lemures, larvae, manes, terrors of tombs, frights of burial places. And to the inner eye occurs the wrath of God, the provocations of demons, blasphemies, desperate and hated salvation. I once knew a man agitated by such things, to whom, while praying, there appeared heads of the dead, black and long beards, horrible eyes, terrifying in aspect. To these things, it was not Saturn that led the wretched man, though he was naturally pleasant and festive, but black bile, which arose from a pressing bad conscience and the recollection of a life badly lived. The same must be said of a Martial person: who, if he excites Martial force and impetus not for the zeal of justice (as he ought), but for satisfying lower pleasures, then there are plunderings, then rapines, then many evils. They could also

--- Page 237 ---
**TONVS TERTIVS. 50**

the influences of those planets which are called benevolent can be led to evil: For Jupiter's disposition, arising from its hot and humid, or benevolent nature, which leads to clemency, could be so augmented that the mind, thus inclined, might be led to complete dissolution. Thus Venus's soft influence, though benevolent, if not moderated, makes one effeminate and enslaved to lust; whence often follow adulteries, incests, rapes, sacrileges, and moreover, deaths, fires, plunders, the overthrowing of cities, and perpetual hatreds. The Sun also, father of life and giver of light, who is also called Apollo, leads to true wisdom and royal dignity. If anyone, however, abuses this splendor of mind obtained from the Sun—indeed, from God through the sun—he will fall into evil pride, haughtiness, arrogance, and contempt for others; thence many evils arise from good, just as from wine gulped down will arise oppression of the heart, weakening of virtue, and many things of that kind, which, however, taken moderately, gladdens the heart and strengthens the powers. Water is a good element, very useful for many things; yet it suffocates the unwary and throws down buildings not well fortified. All influences are therefore good, provided that the subjects are well disposed, as we shall discuss more particularly below.

**How the Craftsman of all things produced all elementary things by the third squared ternary. Chapter XII.**

[Decorative Initial A] Lexander (according to Laertius) relates in the Successions of Philosophers, [Marginal note: Alexan. Lucre.] and in the Pythagorean commentaries, that he noted the monad to be the principle of all things: And that from the monad, an indefinite duality, as matter to the author, was subjected to the monad: and that from the monad and duality, numbers are generated; from numbers, points; from points, lines arise, from which plane figures consist; and from planes, solid bodies consist: Of which the principal are the four elements, from which all elementary things emanate. But since we have already discussed the supercelestial and celestial fabric and its matter, it remains that we speak of the elements, and of the compounds made from them which are subject to corruption. Therefore there are four elements, and primary foundations of things, from which all things are composed: Whose superior forms the ancients said brought aid: To Water, Neptune; to Air, Juno; to Fire, Vulcan. Here some wonder that Augustine, and before him Pliny, [Marginal note: August. Plinius] derided these forms and their proponents. For Augustine indeed derided those who taught that these forms should be adored as certain deities favoring mortals; nor did he deny the archetypal exemplars of things to be made: For there are in the heavens, and in the supramundane world, elements of a better kind, and images of animals: Whose primary kinds, distributed in a quaternary, Ezekiel saw before the tribunal of God, [Marginal note: Ezechi. The. he.] as pertaining to Him, as is taught in the theology of the Hebrews. There also exists another quaternary, of which this fourfold kind of animals stands for one corner; to which are joined three others, namely the Ophaninim, Seraphim, and angels of service, who, together with those animals of holiness (as they say, with Abraham as author in the book of formation), complete the tribunal of God: Who, even if He delights in the ternary number, is nevertheless diffused into created things by means of the quaternary: Therefore through those fourfold, supreme elements,

G ij

--- Page 238 ---
CANTICI PRIMI
Of the First Canticle

inferior, and middle, in a most harmonious number (as we shall presently discuss), dividing this machine into four parts of the world: Eurus, Zephyrus, Auster, and Boreas: and the heavens through those triplicities, fiery, airy, watery, and earthly. From which heaven [come] the four seasons, spring, summer, autumn, and winter: Whence [comes] favor to the fourfold substance, corporeal, vegetative, sensitive, and rational: Which are followed by four corporeal qualities, hot, cold, moist, and dry: Likewise a fourfold quantity, point, length, breadth, [and] depth: Also a fourfold motion, ascent, descent, progression, and circular motion. Our soul also receives a fourfold power from above, namely that rational [part], which Augustine calls the higher portion, and Plotinus calls the intellect, which, according to the same author Plotinus, is what we are: [Marginal note: Augusti. Plotinus] and the animal power, which the Hebrews call *nephes*: fourthly, the spirit connecting all those things: And this man received (as the Stoics teach) the splendor of four virtues: [Marginal note: Stoici] Moreover, four excesses that elevate (if we follow Orphic Theology): Poesy from the Muses; [Marginal note: Orphe.] Mystery from Dionysius; Prophecy from Apollo; Love from Venus: Which enter through four gates: through sense, imagination, phantasy, and intelligence: All these things emanate from the threefold Creator: in whom, however, resides the idea of the quaternary: so that we can learn both from his great tetragrammaton name, which we shall reserve to explain in its proper place.

Why the elements are distributed by the quaternary number. Chapter 42.

[Illuminated initial V] That we may bring forth some things from the storehouses of the Pythagoreans and more secret Theologians, all foundations must be laid by the quaternary number: since it itself is the root and origin of all numbers: For the accumulation from the monad up to four yields ten: [Marginal note: Aristote.] Beyond which number (as Aristotle mentions in his Problems, and Hierocles in [Marginal note: Hierocl.] the verses of Pythagoras) no region, nor any language, ever progressed: For the Hebrews, Greeks, Latins, and all barbarians, when they reached ten, again resuming the monad, say eleven, and so forth, imitating leading nature, which by the decimal law divided the fingers on the hands and feet, indeed, the supreme Creator: who willed to distribute the supercelestial world and archetype (as the Theology of the Hebrews teaches) by that [Marginal note: The. he.] number: Which number contains all kinds of numbering, even and odd, square, quadrantal, long, plane, cubic, pyramidal, prime and composite: By which number also, namely by ten proportions, four cubic numbers are completed: just as the quaternary itself is the root of the denary, and through the denary of the centenary: and through these of the millenary: for one, two, three, and four complete the decade: In a similar way, through tens one arrives at a hundred, and through hundreds at a thousand. Moreover, the quaternary contains all musical harmony: since in it is the double, triple, quadruple, sesquialter, sesquitertia proportion: Whence the octave, double octave, fifth, fourth, and octave together with the fifth—

--- Page 239 ---
TONE THREE.                                                                    51

results from you. Hence Hierocles, interpreter of Pythagoras, so extols this number, [Marginal note: Hierocl.]
that he asserts it to be the maker and cause of all things: because nothing can be said or done
unless it proceeds from the quaternary number as from the root and foundation of all things.
Hence, through it, as through something sacred, the Pythagoreans swore, alluding [Marginal note: Pythag.]
(as I believe) to the Tetragrammaton of the Hebrews, from whom they received those more secret doctrines.
And the followers of Pythagoras, Iamblichus, Syrianus, and Proclus, strive [Marginal note: Iambli. Syrian. Procul.]
to prove that the supernal world is distributed by the same number. But lest we digress
further than is fitting from our elementary reasoning, let us return to the elements:
which are four in the whole machine: And also four elements according to the Metaphysician:
essence, being, power, and action: Four seminal principles of nature according to physicists:
power, natural sprouting, mature form, and composite. Four elements according
to Mathematicians: point, line, plane, and solid. And what is a point in mathematics,
is seminal power in physics; a line, natural sprouting; a surface, mature form;
depth or the cube itself, the composite. Four seminal principles of virtues according
to Ethicists: justice, temperance, fortitude, prudence: Four (as Hierocles teaches) [Marginal note: Hierocl.]
judicial powers in existing things: intellect, discipline, opinion, sense. Four
the supreme moderator commanded to be the foundations of the most perfect, eternal,
and unshaken law, namely, the four gospels: Also, artisans imitating nature
complete buildings with four corners, so that they may be firm. Therefore, the Creator
rightly laid four foundations for the entire mundane fabric from the beginning. But since the Pytha- [Marginal note: Pythag. Academ.]
goreans and Academics reduce this number to the square figure of geometry, and to cubes
and pyramids, let us see how the elements agree with the square figure:
For three squares are assigned: the first is solid; the second cannot be commensurated by us
with a circle; the third, because the diameter will not agree with any side by any section.
So also the elements rejoice in solidity: so that they may be a firm foundation of the entire mundane edifice.
Nor is the co-equality with the circle of divine essence known to us: although it is manifest
to Him who most harmoniously arranged all these things: Nor is its diameter
(which, if I am not mistaken, is man) considered commensurable with any side: For man,
placed as a diameter in the center of the world, does not agree with any determined
creature: but an animal of multiform and dissolutory nature (as is held in [Marginal note: Th. Ch.]
the Theology of the Chaldeans) has free passage to any image whatsoever:
There is, however, a mediate proportion by reducing the lowest quadrature of the elements
into a better square: about which elsewhere. Therefore, these fourfold elements agree in a wonderful
proportion, just as square numbers do: which are concluded by their own number:
and agree with each other by some proportionate mean: For 4 and 9 are square numbers,
the mean is six: from which to 4, there is a sesquialtera proportion: In the same way from 9 to 6.
Thus 9 agrees with 16, another square, whose mean is 12: From which to 9 there is a sesquitertia proportion,
and the same is from 16 to 12. All square numbers proceed in the same order: which imi-
                                                                                                                            G iij

--- Page 240 ---
**CANTICI PRIMI**
OF THE FIRST CANTO

[...which] the proportioned elements imitate with their combined qualities: of which each one retains one as its own; in the other, as if by a middle, it agrees with the following element. Water is humid and cold: it retains humidity as its own, but in coldness it participates with earth. Earth is cold and dry: cold is proper to it, in which it agrees with water; but in dryness it is equal to fire. Whence, just as earth relates in coldness with water, in like manner in dryness with fire; and this (fire) in heat with air, which (air) is adapted to water in humidity. Moreover, the Academics discovered another agreement in the quaternary number, extending up to a quadruple proportion, to which alone musical ratios proceed; for by proceeding further, the ears seem to be offended. For fire is twice as subtle as air, three times more mobile than water, twice as acute; although air is twice as acute as water, three times more subtle, four times more mobile. Again, water...

[Marginal note:] Academics.

[Diagram 1: A rectangle with diagonal lines connecting elements.]
[Labels: (Not provided)]

--- Page 241 ---
**THIRD TONE. 52**

Nor can any more elegant reason be adduced why water does not suffocate the earth, even though it is above it, unless it is because it does not wish to depart from the harmony by which the Creator bound them together in themselves, and in compounds, the more perfectly, the more perfect the compound is in its parts.

**That the elements are found in all worldly members. Chapter XIV.**

[Decorative initial Q] Therefore, the four elements correspond to four kinds of perfect compounds: stones, metals, plants, and animals. The first of these is founded upon the earthy corner of this worldly house: For stones imitate the earth, always descending towards the center, unless they have been burned, like pumice stones made spongy with air-filled caverns. But when reduced to powder, resuming their proper stony nature, they descend. And with stones are numbered crystal and beryl, which, although generated from water, are so congealed that, having become earthy, they descend: Which does not happen with frost and snow. Also, stones generated in the bladder, imitating earthy nature, descend, although they are generated from watery humor. And all of these are concreted by a certain astringency, so that they cannot be liquefied like metals, although they descend, like stones. Upon the second, watery corner, metals are constructed: which, although they are made from all elements (according to Hermes), [Marginal note: Herm.] nevertheless, most especially, being melted from water, they partake of its nature and liquefy: so that in this we have as witnesses Timaeus Locrus, Plato, Plotinus, Aristotle, Avicenna, and the more recent ones following them. [Marginal notes: Timæ. Plato. Plotinus Aristo. Democ. Albertin.] Nor does Democritus disagree, whom some imagine to have taught that metals are generated from lye and lime: For it would dry out like cement, nor could it be liquefied. This matter is pursued at length by Albert the Great, but more concisely by Abubacher. We see (he says) in mines, that due to the continuous heat of certain mountains, the grosser parts of water are so much boiled down and thickened, that in time it becomes quicksilver. And from the fatness of the earth, by the same boiling down and heat, sulfur is generated: and with continued heat, metals are generated. For gold, having no defect, is generated from quicksilver and pure, fixed, clear, and red sulfur. Silver from the same mobile quicksilver and fixed, pure, clear, and white sulfur, which lacks color, some fixity, and consequently weight. Imperfect tin from the same imperfect parts, with sparse boiling down and digestion intervening. Lead from the same earthy and dreggy quicksilver, lacking purity, fixity, and from coarse, somewhat red sulfur, which lacks fixity, purity, and boiling down: Whence it becomes very imperfect. Copper, moreover, from the same impure, unfixed, earthy, burning, unclear (quicksilver), and from such combustible sulfur, which lacks fixity, purity, and weight: Whence it is imperfect and unclean. Finally, iron from the same impure, fixed, partly earthy and burning, white, unclear (quicksilver), and from less fixed, earthy, and burning sulfur: whence it is imperfect and unclean: from which purity is absent: and weight is lacking. Since all these are from quicksilver, and that is watery, therefore they partake of the nature of water. G iij supports this.

--- Page 242 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

[Marginal notes: Auice. Gilgil.] Avicenna, both in his *Physics* and in in his letter to Hazem the philosopher. But Gilgil of Seville was of the opinion that metals are generated from ashes: because they sink in water, and liquefy, like glass, which is extracted from earthy ash and fused stone. But this does not conclude [the argument]: because metal sinks from its earthy [nature], incorporated with moisture, its porosities closed, retaining air. Nor is nitre derived from earthy matter, but from the radical moisture intrinsic to the ashes and stones themselves: for in every compound there are four elements. Upon the third angle, namely the airy one, plants are constructed: which (unless under the open sky) do not sprout: nor do they coalesce. And although the other elements intervene in the composition of the plant itself, and of all other things, it nevertheless savors of an airy nature. For the plant always seeks air related to itself: and wood deprived of air immediately corrupts: and rots: unless aqueous humor, which participates with air, comes to its aid. Upon the fourth angle of this fourfold edifice, which is fire, the zoophyte is fabricated: or animal, whose life (as many wise men teach, Plotinus especially) is fiery, derived from the fiery heaven: and life from the spirit, [Marginal notes: Ezechi. Virgilius] which is fiery, vivifying all the mundane wheels: as we are taught by the oracle of Ezekiel, where he says: "And the spirit of life was in the wheels." With this, Maro (Virgil), imitating the footsteps of the ancients, or seized by poetic frenzy, sings: "Fiery is their vigor, and celestial their origin." Therefore, upon the four elemental bases, five principal kinds of compounds are fabricated: which complete the ennead, namely stones, metals, plants, zoophytes, and animals, which are in the fiery angle. However, the zoophyte, since it is a certain mixture and imperfect: does not have a determined angle: but is received in the bosom of the others.

On another division of elemental things: by which many objections that could be made concerning the aforesaid are removed. Chapter XV.

**E**T if to each angle, or element of this square house, its universal genus has been assigned, they are nevertheless distinguished from one another. For although stones are earthy, all are nevertheless sometimes denominated by another element intervening more strongly. Undoubtedly all elements concur in composing stones, but especially earth and water: Hence opaque stones are called earthy, while transparent ones are called aqueous.

Some liquefy with the strongest fire: so that they are converted into glass. Some are generated drop by drop from falling rain in shells: like pearls in the Indian and British seas. Cry- [Marginal notes: Augusti. Aristote.] stal and Beryl (as Augustine and Aristotle write, and experience teaches) are made from congealed water, with their porosities evacuated: so that they can neither absorb heat nor liquefy. Fire is also present in the composition of stones: which is also extracted from flint struck by steel: and sometimes resolves itself within it: unless Hermes is deceived: who in his arcana teaches that stone ascends from earth to heaven, that is, fire: and from heaven returns again to its nourishing earth: To which heaven (as he says) the wind carried it, enclosed in its belly. Metals also, even if they are aqueous, by their very—

--- Page 243 ---
**TONUS TERTIUS. 53**

...some of them, however, partake of a fiery nature: such as gold and iron: of which the one imitates the solar fire, the other the Martial fire. But tin and copper are airy: the former receiving its airy nature from Jupiter, the latter from Venus. Silver, however, is earthy with the Moon; lead with Saturn; and quicksilver in water agrees with Mercury: who is (as they say) the lord of the waves. All, however, are endowed with a watery nature: so that they liquefy and differ in weight. For just as water differs from water in weight, so metal from metal, not only by specific kind, but individually. For in weight, barbaric gold differs from refined gold: Tharsian from Indian and Hungarian: and this from Spanish: but that from Eiulat gold: which, coming through the Gihon river, when it perceives the virtue of the fountain existing in the garden of delights, is the best of all: just as water, the closer and more perfect it is to its source, the lighter it is. For waters differ by region and situation in goodness and weight: by which (as Vitruvius states) the goodness of the air is recognized: and there he orders places for constructing buildings to be decided. Plants also, although they are of an airy nature, nevertheless the roots, sap, leaves, and flowers of some are said to be hot, in the first, second, third, or fourth degree: some cold, or dry, and of this kind: concerning which the present place does not permit discussion. That diversity, however, arises when a plant more or less takes on the nature of some element. Animals also, although they are fiery, some, however, being more earthy, delight in the earth: such as the mole, worms, and commonly all reptiles: All aquatic fish are nourished by water: the chameleon by air: the salamander by fire, and some of them are fervent with heat: such as doves, lions: Some are depressed by moisture, such as the lamb: some by dryness: such as the hare, the fawn: All fiery things, however, are distinguished by degrees: whence they borrow names from the elements: or from their qualities.

**That elements are found not only in this terrestrial world, but also in the celestial, supercelestial, and archetypal. Chapter XVI.**

[Illuminated initial E] There are most ample witnesses that elements are found in all things: But those which are found in this lower world are dregs-like and coarser: Those in heaven: bright and pure: Those above the heavens: living, and beneficial in every part. And, to begin from the lower things, this earth around the center is a stable foundation for the feet, the most fertile mother of all seeds. There is density in heaven: which can be seen especially in the Sun, and Moon, and stars: which (as Plotinus states) repel the solar rays. There is (earth/density) in angels: so that they may be firm seats of God: and fertile for us, giving fertility to this dregs-like earth as ministers of God. There is in the archetype of all things a firm and most fertile nature: concerning which it is said: Let the earth open: and bring forth a savior. This water is light and most watery, cleansing and washing all things. There is (water) in the heavens, irrigating the earth with its flow: and a commingling virtue (as Basil discusses in a long discourse). There is (water) in angels, teaching and cleansing: concerning which, when speaking of heaven, it is sung in the psalms: "Who rules over the waters above..."

G v.
[Marginal note: Vitruvius]
[Marginal note: Plotinus]
[Marginal note: Isaiah]
[Marginal note: Basil]
[Marginal note: Psalm]

--- Page 244 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

its higher [waters]. It is in the Creator: by which it performs the washing away of sins, and regenerates, puri-
fies, illuminates, and nourishes. But observe the difference of these waters: This earthly moisture
overwhelms the heat of life, the celestial irrigates, the supercelestial understands: the divine purifies
and nourishes minds. Here is this elemental air, by which we breathe, see, hear, and
smell. There is in the heavens a translucent nature: beyond which we be-
hold the fixed stars: There is in the higher heaven a space: where resounds the sweetest harmony
of the blessed: where that vision is revealed, both of the body of the prince, and of the queen, and of all the soldiers.
There is in angels a vital breath, and a subtle breeze. There is in the Creator the highest and most per-
fect life, and spirit: by which, breathing into all, He gives to all, that they may live and
[Marginal note: Elijah.] breathe: and by which, as with a whisper of a subtle breeze, He speaks to Elijah and other members of His household. There is
elemental fire among us, heating, cooking, and perfecting. It is in the hea-

--- Page 245 ---
TOMVS TERTIVS. 34

let us turn to our own [examples]. There is fire, concerning which the supreme teacher threatens the impious, saying: "Go, you cursed, into eternal fire." There is air, concerning which Isaiah [says]: "The Lord will strike you with corrupted air:" [Marginal note: CHRISTVS. Isaias Iob idem]
which is commonly interpreted concerning the damned. There is water (as Job testifies, who says): "They will pass from the waters of snow to excessive heat." Finally, there is the most unhappy earth in the center of this earth, concerning which Job again [says]: "Therefore, leave me, that I may weep a little before I go, and do not return, to the land of darkness, and covered with the gloom of death, a land of misery and shadows." Therefore, the elements are in God the seeds of things, and the ideas and origins of what is to be produced: in angels, distributed powers: in heaven, certain virtues: in the nature of things, seeds: in this lower world, coarser forms: For if there were not elementary virtues in heaven, how would these elements be generated and transmuted by its influence: so that what is now air is converted into rain, water exhales into air, earth is turned into wood, from which fire, and from that air, and ashes which are earth? Hence astronomers name signs and planets from the elements, attributing three signs to each element: But in the Creator, it is necessary that all things exist which He distributes: as that celebrated Peripatetic saying goes: "No one gives what he does not have." Therefore, these fourfold fun- [Marginal note: Arist:]
dations of all things are from God, whose name is of four letters: Each of which contains a circular number: and hence those letters encompass all numbers that are called circular: Wherefore it is hinted to us with great mystery: that every revolution of generation, and corruption, and vicissitude of things must at last return to that from which they proceeded: Which mysteries, perhaps with the Lord's help, we will explain more clearly elsewhere.

On the figure of the elements according to the Pythagoreans, and Pla-
tonists. Chapter XVII.

<span style="font-size: 3em; line-height: 0.8em; vertical-align: -0.2em;">T</span>imæus Locrus, from the Pythagorean school, and after him Plato, ascribed [Marginal note: Timæ. Plato.]
figures of this kind to the elements: First, to Earth, a cube of eight
angles and six sides, in the form of a die: And this because of its sta-
bility, heaviness, and difficulty of motion. But they form Fire into
a pyramid of four bases and four angles: so that it may have an easier ascent. They construct Air into an octahedron, that is, a body of eight faces: namely, from eight bases and six solid angles, and twenty-four plane angles: And this because it follows fire in ascent. Finally, they say Water holds an Icosahedral figure: which has twenty bases and twelve angles: because water, by its flexible nature, is mobile and very easy to divide: All these figures are derived from the quaternary: For earth from the first two squares: Fire from four bases and as many angles: Air from twice four bases: For they are doubled, so that it may be penetrative from both sides, and of easier motion. And the plane angles from six quaternaries: But water from twenty bases and twelve angles, which make 32: Which number is from two squares, whose root is four-

--- Page 246 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

four. Again, there are bases from five quaternaries, and angles from three: And
all these they place universally in a dodecahedral figure, that is, in a solid with twelve
faces: which consists of twelve pentagonal bases, twenty solid angles, and
sixty planar angles: All of which arise from the quaternary: twelve from three qua-
ternaries: twenty from five: sixty from fifteen. Moreover, the fullest harmony
of all these elements is gathered from those bases and angles. The proportion of Air
to Fire is double in the bases, sesquialtera in the solid angles, but double in the pla-
nes: whence results a harmony of a double diapason and a diapente. But the pro-
portion of Fire to Earth in the bases is sesquialtera: but in the angles double: from
which again, a diapason and a diapente. But the proportion of Earth to Water in the bases is
triple sesquitertia: in the angles sesquialtera: whence a diapason, a diapente, and
a diatessaron in the bases: but in the angles a diapente results. But the proportion of Water to Air
in the bases is double sesquialtera: but in the angles double: whence a diapason, and a diapen-
te in the bases: but in the angles, again a diapason arises. However,
the harmony and proportion of fire to water, and of air
to earth, in which there is a full contrariety in qualities,
is somewhat lacking from that proportion which the elements
have when placed in their proper order: and where two always
meet through an intermediary: which
participates in both: as
the experienced can calculate.

--- Page 247 ---
TONE FOUR. 55

[Decorative initial Q] By what mutual harmonies the primary genera of things agree with each
other, and with the archetype. Fourth Tone.
How angels of the first order agree with the first heaven, which
is called the *primum mobile*. Chapter One.
By what harmony the cherubim respond to the starry heaven. Chapter II.
The wondrous oracle of Ezekiel confirms this. Chapter III.
Five properties of the Thrones. Chapter IIII.
By what consonance Saturn is equated with the same properties. Chapter V.
Ten properties of the Dominions. Chapter VI.
By what harmony Jupiter imitates all the same. Chapter VII.
Concerning three equations of Mars' fire with the Virtues. Chapter VIII.
How they still agree in six other conditions. Chapter IX.
The Sun, agreeing in eight ways with the Powers, renders a great melody as if a diapason.
Chapter X.
In five ways the Principalities participate with Venus. Chapter XI.
By what song Mercury sings in harmony with the Archangels. Chapter XII.
How finally the Moon is fitted together with the Angels. Chapter XIII.
Again, the earth agrees with the Moon. Chapter XIIII.
Water resonates in harmony with Mercury and Saturn. Chapter XV.
Air re-echoes with Jupiter and Venus. Chapter XVI.
Fire glows with the Sun and Mars. Chapter XVII.
Stones sing in harmony with the heavens. Chapter XVIII.
Metals do the same with a more sonorous voice, especially with Mars. Chapter XIX.
Herbs correspond to the heavens with a more lively sound, especially to Jupiter. Chapter XX.
Zoophytes sing in harmony with Saturn. Chapter XXI.
Animals sing in harmony with the starry heaven and the *primum mobile*. Chapter XXII.
The same sing in harmony especially with the supercelestial world. Chapter XXIII.
Which in particular agree with Saturn. Chapter XXIIII.
Which harmonize with Jupiter. Chapter XXV.
Which respond to Mars. Chapter XXVI.
Which sing in harmony with the Sun, or Phoebus. Chapter XXVII.
Which delight with Venus. Chapter XXVIII.
Which resonate in harmony with Mercury. Chapter XXIX.
How all these things bring about a perfected consonance of harmony with the Moon.
Chapter XXX.
Which in particular resonate with certain particular stars. Chapter XXXI.
How beautifully all these things are depicted in the ark, which Moses built by celestial oracle.
Chapter XXXII.
By how great a mystery all enneads agree in their tenth. Chapter XXXIII.

--- Page 248 ---
CANTICLE ONE

HOW THE FIRST ANGELS
of the order agree with the first heaven which is called the *primum mobile*. Chapter One.

[Large decorative initial P depicting a figure in a landscape] OSTQUAM we have discussed the generation of the three enneads, let us come to their harmony, namely the particular consonance of one fabric with another. And starting from the highest spirits, so that we may presuppose something solid, we will approach our Areopagite Dionysius, a true contemplator of mysteries: Who, bringing forth those mysteries which Paul (as some think), [Marginal note: Diony.] but Hierotheus (as he himself confesses) had entrusted to him, [Marginal note: Hierot.] says: that all inferior intelligences are illuminated, taught, and purified by the superior ones, and finally sent to execute the works of God: The supreme ones, however, are destined by God alone: and all are ministering spirits sent for service. But there is a difference: because the first are commanded by God alone: while the subsequent ones are destined and impelled by God and the superior ones, yet by God's command. Here Paul, teaching that all are sent, and Dionysius, saying that [Marginal note: Paulus Diony.] the superior ones are not destined by others, namely intelligences: but by God alone: as we have in the heavenly oracle of Isaiah: where it is said: One of the Seraphim, [Marginal note: Iſaias.] that is, of the supreme ones, flew to me, commanded namely by God, to whose throne and majesty he had been brought for contemplation: from whence that Seraph was destined. But because Dionysius [Marginal note: Diony.] teaches that "seraph" is a name of office, not of person: then some, deceived, said that he was not of the supreme ones, but had performed the office of a superior: Which (unless I am mistaken) is not according to Dionysius's meaning, since all Seraphim are named from שרף (saraph), that is, *saraph* in Hebrew, which in Latin means "to set on fire": And their office is to ignite not only themselves, but also the inferior ones: to whom they are sent: Nor does an inferior perform their ministry: nor does he claim the name of the superiors for himself. Therefore, when that Seraph came to ignite Isaiah and purify his lips with a burning coal: he was a Seraph by office, name, and supreme order. These supreme ones, therefore, who are destined by God alone, agree with the *primum mobile*: which is moved and revolved only by the first mover: Which first mover is either the first of the intelligences: to whom the heavens are entrusted: or the first moderator of all things: Which [Marginal note: Procul. Platon. Triſme.] Proclus and other Platonists, agreeing in like manner with Trismegistus, teach, as [Marginal note: Boëtius] Boethius sings.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You, connecting the middle soul of triple nature, moving all things,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Resolve it through harmonious members:
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Which, when divided, has gathered two motions into orbits.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It goes, about to return into itself: and the deep mind
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It circles, and at the same time turns the heaven with its image.
Other heavens, however, are moved by a certain rapture from the *primum mobile*, indeed from the first mover:

--- Page 249 ---
**VOLUME FOUR. 56**

but from inferior intelligences by a particular motion and its own sphere: And just as the first is moved by a single impulse, so it receives a single influx: But others receive various influxes according to the variety of movers and motions. Hence the Arab, though barbarically, yet truly [Marginal note: Auerroi] states, saying: The best has its perfection from itself: But that which is near to this (the best) is by few, or one operation, and only one motion: But that which is far removed is by many: for the higher one is, the greater is its motion in virtue, but lesser in number: And the lower one is, the greater is its motion in number, but lesser in virtue, all other things being equal: For the Sun, although it is in the middle of the planets, yet in virtue it is the greatest, and king of the wandering stars: whence, like a king, it holds the middle position. That order is also evident in a civil republic and in the supercelestial realm: For in a civil republic, ministers are agitated and troubled about many things, so that they may fulfill the commands of the ruler: But the chief stewards, being commanded, give commands and are moved to few things: But the lords, with a certain gravity, almost immovably command, not departing from their place, nor from their purpose. Also in the supercelestial republic, the inferior intelligences are called in Hebrew מלאכים [Marginal note: Mala-] Malakhim, in Greek angeli (angels), but in Latin nuntii (messengers) or missi (sent ones), because they are more frequently destined to us to carry the commands of the supreme (being). But the superior intelligences, because they are rarely destined, are called "assistants" by Daniel. [Marginal note: chim] [Marginal note: Daniel] Nevertheless, they are sent sometimes, if what Paul states is true, [Marginal note: Paulus] saying that all are ministering spirits sent for the salvation of those who are capable of eternal inheritance. But the intermediate (intelligences) are sent more frequently to the superior ones, and more rarely to the inferior ones: So also in the celestial Republic, the superior circles move more slowly, the lowest ones more quickly. The Moon, the lowest of all circles, completes its own motion in twenty-eight or twenty-nine days. Saturn, higher up, in thirty years: The Sun and Venus, intermediate, in one year: The starry heaven, the supreme of all spheres which are seen, completes its revolution in many thousands of years: although all are carried along by the first mobile, whose motion is immediately from the first mover: whence it is unique and simple: But those of the inferior circles are multiple. But if it pleases (us) to run through the particular correspondences which that first mobile has with the supreme order of intelligences, which is that of the Seraphim: let us see what that great Dionysius states about these Seraphic minds from the workshop of his teacher: [Marginal note: Diony:] For he attributes sixteen (qualities) to them, saying: The surname of the Seraphim is "always moving around divine things," "incessantly hot," "acutely superfervid," "of inflexible perpetual motion," "reducing the placed ranks," "active exemplar," "reheating those lower things," "reducing to a similar heat, by that fiery celestial vigor obtained, those things which as holocausts, it purifies with the utmost force of fire:" "Not existing veiled, but lucid," "inextinguishable," "always illuminating," "expelling all dark obscurity:" And let us see how much the first mobile agrees with the Seraphim in these respects: For since it is the first thing that is moved, and immediately by the first mover, it is deservedly always carried in its revolution towards that very first (mover), so that, seizing its commands, it may fulfill all things in others according to the will of the commander. Secondly, it is necessary that it be strong with incessant heat, by which it may be moved without interruption, and with such force draw with it

--- Page 250 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

all things: so that it is minimally impeded by such a great machine. Moreover, it must be sharp
in virtue, by which it penetrates all things: and diffuses its power even to the outermost spheres.
And since it carries all things along, it is more fervent than all of them: Therefore, as it says, it is super-fervid,
namely, the genus of Seraphim: if indeed they ought to move all inferiors,
and make them fervent and deifying, so too ought that be super-fervid, by which
it makes all things fervent for motion: And since all inferior things are moved at its nod,
so that they always fulfill what the supreme commands, both are compelled to have an inflexible
motion: And lest the labor of both in moving things subject to them seem in vain: just as the Seraphim,
by their fiery power, lead back lower minds to God: so this (the first mobile), by its fiery
impetus, moving all things, disposes them so that they return to the first: And because both not
only impel, but also carry along by preceding, they are called active exemplars: Of these,
the Seraphim by the fire of love, and that fiery sphere by its swiftest motion and influence,
heat all things: and thus lead them back into that fire by which they themselves are kindled: But those (Seraphim)
draw power from God, whom they enjoy: and this (sphere) from the revolutions of the great name, twelve—
[Marginal note: Hebrews.] —which the Hebrews call *hauaiæ*: Each of which is placed before one sign: and
[Marginal note: Greeks] then the name, which the Hebrews call of four letters, the Greeks *tetragrammaton*, Pythagoras
[Marginal note: Pythag.] calls *tetractys*, to all signs: The virtue of these is in the first mobile, as astronomers say:
although images appear in the starry heaven not only in the position of the stars, but in
true figures: as proven at certain times and with instruments by most reputable men,
who with their own eyes saw the figure of Taurus or Aries in the circle of the signs. Therefore,
by the virtue of that holy of holies and most holy name, those (Seraphim) by inflaming, and as if—
[Marginal note: Plato.] —as if by a fuller's wheel, by purifying those it moves, they ignite them: so that like burnt offerings
they ascend to the supreme. And just as the Seraphim know nothing superior by which they might be
covered, since they are devoted to the first light without intermediary: so this circle does not have a
superior mobile circle: since it is contiguous to the empyrean sphere and the seat of God: which is suffused
with such divine light that it obscures nothing, but illuminates, clothed in a superior
nature: just like all denary things, about which will be discussed in their proper place: hence both are always
lucid. They also contain inextinguishable light and fire: by which they always
inflame and illuminate: so that those (Seraphim) by perpetual illuminating fire, and this (sphere) by its rapture
and fiery power, after many circuits, having cast off impurities, renders all things to be purified,
purged to the Creator: so much so that they make their destined return to the same.

**How the Cherubim correspond to the starry heaven. Chapter II.**

<span style="font-size: 2em; line-height: 0.5em; vertical-align: -0.2em;">S</span>ucceeds the Cherubic order, and let us see how much it agrees with the starry heaven.
A cherub is (if the now common Chaldean interpretations are true) an immaculate picture:
hence Cherub is said to be a Phrygian work, or a fiction:
or (as Abraham ben Ezra prefers) it is a picture, or
image of any separate form: But what more beautiful picture in the entire machine of the
world than the eighth heaven? where there are many images not from Phrygian
Indians, or from Arachne of Lydia: but from Pallas herself, and divine wisdom: which of heaven

--- Page 251 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 57

he painted that with figures always living (as some prefer) and full of virtue: just as he had painted the species of ideas in the Cherubic minds. Therefore, by another interpretation, Cherub is called multiplied knowledge, or fullness of knowledge, or many knowledges, and orders, or much order: from כרה *cara*, which means 'he ordered', and רב *rab*, which means 'much'. For in them is multiplied knowledge, and manifold species of things, and in heaven many images. In both places, moreover, the picture is without blemish, and indelible: which will not be consumed by any destructive flood of envious time: nor will it receive any foreign picture or impression, both being filled with full images from the fount of ideas: from which also, as from exemplary forms, this earth is composed with such a living adornment of flowers and herbs. For just as the earth is adorned with flowers, heaven with stars, so the Cherubic mind is adorned with various scientific forms. Therefore it is called multiplied knowledge, its contemplation extended to knowing the most diverse things. Likewise, the starry heaven is multiplied light for cherishing the most diverse things. The Cherubim also cherish these lower things through the same heaven, the first cause giving them the source from which they flow. Hence the psalmist sings: He ascended upon Che [Marginal note: Dauid] rubim, and flew: that is, to arrange all things most swiftly through their all-encompassing knowledge and virtue. And this is that first operative virtue (to use the words of Dionysius) by which the Cherubim are filled and disposed to adapt lower things: [Marginal note: Diony.] as Hugo and Albertus understand in their exposition. And what the supreme artificer does through the Cheru- [Marginal note: Vgo Albertus] bim, as through ministers and secondary causes, he likewise brings about through the starry sphere, as through an instrument: as many Catholics agree with the Academics.

Moreover (says Dionysius), the Cherubic order is filled [Marginal note: Diony.] with divine beauty and wise tradition, and communicative to secondary kinds: So also the eighth sphere is full of most beautiful stars and virtues to be communicated to the second kind, namely, the wandering stars. It is common among [Marginal note: Astron.] astronomers how much power the signs exert on the planets when they receive them in their domiciles. Also manifest is the disposition which they induce in the horoscope of someone born, nor less in arranging other things of the lower world: so that they seem to moderate this mechanism beneath the lunar sphere, yet drawing favor from the supreme parent and his holy name: as is sung in the Davidic hymn: O Lord our Lord, [Marginal note: Dauid] how wonderful is your name in all the earth: which through those sidereal figures, and virtues imbibed from the holy name, draws life, beauty, and virtue. To these intervene the seven wandering stars: which themselves, from the seven measures or circles of the fabric (as Hebrew theology teaches), through their seven [Marginal note: The. he.] regulating intelligences, receive whence they flow. That starry circle is divided into twelve principal images: each of which disposes both a part of the earth subject to it, and some member of the lesser world: Whence both worlds are regulated by that heaven itself, whose middle circle is called the circle of Minerva, or Justice, by the Memphitics, and the king's guide by the Arabs. For by that, as by a certain rod, [Marginal note: Aegyp. Arabib.] the supreme king moderates lower things through the Cherubim, as through ministers:
H

--- Page 252 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

in which that unique knowledge of the king is multiplied: so that by repeated instances they may understand those things which the Supreme One comprehends in a single act. Thus also heaven unfolds by repeated revolutions those things which the Creator bestows by a single influx. And just as the star-bearing heaven is turned by the Prime Mover, so the Cherubim are inspired by the first order of angels, namely the Seraphic [Marginal note: Academics]: so that there may also be found in them that doctrine of the Academics, indeed of divine men, by which it is taught that those who desire to become learned and wise should first become lovers, so that through love, being affected by the beauty of things, they may be moved to contemplate them [Marginal note: Plato Plotinus. Dionysius]: concerning which Plato writes most extensively in the *Symposium*, and Plotinus in *On the Triple Return of the Soul to God*. Hence, those things which seemed contradictory in Dionysius easily reconcile: For he teaches that lower angels are taught, illuminated, and purified by higher ones; and again he says that the Cherubim receive immediately from God those things which they communicate to the second order. For all contemplate the divine essence without intermediary: as in

--- Page 253 ---
**FOURTH TONE.**
        58
as they walked, they went in four directions: nor did they turn back, as they went: but to the place to which the first looked, or the head, following him they went: nor did they turn back, as they went. And all their flesh, and their back, and their hands, and their wings, and the Ophannim were full of eyes all around the four Ophannim. And he called the Ophannim themselves wheels in my ears. Here I would like to ask the wise not to criticize me if I shall have departed from the common interpretation of this passage of our Ezekiel. All Catholics admit four senses in the sacred page: By which the truth of the letter, the soul's concern, the mystery of the church, and the secret of heavenly glory shine forth. And of these, the first is called literal, the next moral, the third allegorical, the last anagogical by all. But if with these a description of the worldly fabric is admitted, that will not inappropriately be called the natural sense. This method of interpretation is often used by Origen, easily the foremost of all interpreters of sacred literature among us.

--- Page 254 ---
FOURTH TONE.
        58
they walked, they advanced in four directions: nor did they turn back while they went: but to the
place, to which the first looked, or the head, following him they went: nor did they turn back,
while they went. And all their flesh, and their back, and their hands, and their wings,
and the Ophannim were full of eyes all around the four Ophannim. And he called the Ophannim
themselves wheels, in my hearing. Here I would ask the wise not to criticize me,
if I have separated this passage of our Ezekiel from the common interpretation.
All Catholics admit four senses in the sacred page: through which the truth of the
letter, the concern of the soul, the mystery of the Church, and the secret of heavenly glory
shines forth. And of these, the first is called literal, the next moral, the third allegorical, the last
anagogical by all. But if, along with these, a description of the mundane fabric is
admitted, that natural sense will not incongruously be called. This method of
interpretation is frequently used by Origen, easily the foremost among our interpreters of sacred literature.

[Graphic of an open book. On the left page is the number 2. On the right page is the number 3 above a crossed-out number 4.]

Incorrect pagination — incorrect date
NF Z 43-120-12

READ PAGE(S) 59

--- Page 255 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

he was performing the work. For even if all things were made through the word: nevertheless, He himself, as the supreme Prince, executes many things through ministers. And after he received the fire, the prophet states that he went forth to the work: because just as the craftsman, girded with love (as
[Marginal note: Diony. Boëtius] Dionysius, Boethius, and other wise men attest), went forth to construct the fabric: so the ministers, kindled by love, execute what the craftsman commands. Nor, however, are the ministers themselves, because they cooperate with the Artist, called creators of things, but executors of Him by whom all things are made: Whence it follows: And there appeared among the Cherubim the likeness of a man's hand, namely of Him who said: My Father works until now: and I work. And lest anyone suspect from this interpretation that the Cherubim are in any way creators of things, we can also console the cavillers, interpreting the passage differently: that the cherub might be ideal knowledge, or the cognition of things to be made, which has received the fire of love from the midst of the cherubim, that is, of ideas and images:

--- Page 256 ---
**FOURTH TONE.** [Page number] **61**

Similarly, it is interpreted as chrysolite: which in Hebrew gives, [Hebrew: תרשיש] *Tarshish*, and this is said to be of a celestial color, or of the high sea, and its virtues favor digestion and fattening. Whence concerning Asher (to whom this stone was assigned) it is said in Jacob's prophecy: "Asher, his bread is rich: and he shall yield dainties to kings." And if we wish to accommodate all interpretations: we can indeed from the Symbol of all things which are contained in one mysterious name of the sacred language. For if its meaning is sea: since water is the seedbed of things together with earth, what is more suitably adapted for arranging matter than the watery virtue supplied by the Ophaninim? But if by Tarshish the prophet understands carbuncle (which is called anthrax in Greek, and by another name is red, but it shines in the night; yet it is not red [in its light] at all; and it imprints a figure on all stones, but does not receive one; and is said to be the most precious of all by Pliny, Calistratus, Aaron, Archelaus, Aluredus, and Arnoldus) [Marginal note: Pliny, Calistratus, Aaron, Archelaus, Aluredus, Arnoldus, Thethel also] this indeed is most suitable: For the Ophaninim, by arranging darkened matter, illuminate it, and dispose it to receive form and figure: whence their operation is precious. But if by Tarshish hyacinth ought to be understood: it itself is watery (as Arnoldus agrees) and, being in harmony with the sea and water, extinguishes ardor with its coldness. It also compares grace and glory, says Thethel, whence it is also suitable, with the Ophaninim arranging matter by watery virtue, from which grace, form, and glory may be drawn into the subject. But if they interpret chrysolite well: as it is held in common usage, it itself is similar to gold, with a somewhat marine color, as Pliny, Arnoldus, and Bochus write: [Marginal note: Pliny, Arnoldus, Bochus] whence for arranging, that virtue is most suitable, from its softening watery nature, and its golden color most apt for depiction, especially of stars. But if we wish to follow Bachai: [Marginal note: Bachai] that it is a stone favoring digestion and fattening: this also is most suitable: since the office of the Ophaninim is to digest and to fatten matter. [Marginal note: Ezekiel] The interpreter of sacred texts adds: that there were four Ophaninim for arranging matter which was to receive the forms of the four elements, before the composite was brought together. But because in composites only one face is perceived: therefore it follows, that their appearance was a single likeness: as if there were an Ophaninus within an Ophaninus: because in composites each element is in another: and if the composite is resolved, it returns to those four elements. Therefore it follows: "And when they went," namely, from the friendship of the composite towards themselves, they advanced in four directions: and "they did not turn back when they went": because the elements, coming to resolution, do not return into the composite: unless they are led back by a superior cause: whence it adds: "To the place whither the head, or their leader, tended, the elements themselves followed in obedience to the superior cause." But that the flesh, back, hands, and wings of the Ophaninim are said to be full of eyes, is most beautiful: since in arranging the elements, as many eyes are required in those who arrange, as there are forms to be introduced into that subject matter. For forms are eyes, and the splendors of composite things. And that the Ophaninim are called wheels in the ears of the prophet is consistent: because generations,
H iij

--- Page 257 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &

--- Page 258 ---
**FOURTH TONE.** **60**

Lastly, it concludes that, given their complete disposition, proximity, and customary nature, they are made God-bearing by the immediate mystery of God. Indeed, the best description by which the seats of God are first declared to be removed from all unworthiness and most sublime, according to that of Ecclesiasticus: "I dwell in the highest places." Afterwards, that the seats are joined together by truth and love, where the most just judge ought to sit; and that they always tend towards Him whom they serve, and from whom they draw, so that they may be worthy seats; which so imbibe that divine power that they lead the purified to God Himself, but terrify and offend the defiled. Hence, concerning such things, the divine John says in his Patmos vision: "From his throne proceed lightnings and voices, namely, threatening ones, and terrifying thunders." And concerning the favor granted to us by them, Paul, the inspector of sacraments, states: "Let us approach," he says, "with confidence to the throne of God, to obtain from there what we seek." Nor should that of the Psalmist offend anyone: "Who sits upon the Cherubim," because, as Lord of all, He sits at will in the Cherubim, Seraphim, and even in the souls of the just. For it is written: "The soul of the just is the seat of wisdom." But most especially is He said to sit in the Thrones, as the name indicates. Since these are joined together by Seraphic love and illuminated by Cherubic splendor, therefore, He is said to sit in the Cherubim and Seraphim. And since the whole heaven is joined together by the glue of golden charity (as John testifies), therefore, through Isaiah, He says: "Heaven is my seat:" And since this lower mechanism is always ready for Him, He adds: "And the earth is the footstool of my feet." In which He operates and distributes all things, dividing to each as He wills, just as the soul moves all members of the body at will; yet its primary seat is the heart, just as God's more powerful seat is heaven, and within it, the order of Thrones.
[Marginal note: Ecclesia.]
[Marginal note: Ioannes]
[Marginal note: Paulus Dauid]
[Marginal note: Isaias]

  *How great is the consonance by which Saturn is equated with the same properties. Chapter V.*

**S** But let us see if this order of thrones agrees with Saturn. The Thrones are said to be exalted above the lower orders: Hence they are familiar to God, who through them judges all things contained in His handiwork. Saturn is also the seventh of the planets in ascent, a kind of seat: So that not without mystery God is said to have rested on the day dedicated to it; and commanded His people to rest on the same day; which is called Sabbath, that is, rest, named from Saturn, which in Hebrew is שבתי (shabbatai), which can be interpreted as "my rest" or "my seats." Nor should it be argued from this that that most divine law is Saturnian, or taught by Saturn, since in it its observers are commanded not to fear the stars, and in the same (law) they themselves are declared not to be subject to the stars, although anyone can obtain favor for themselves from God through celestial instruments and through His ministers. But if we wish that those to whom that law was given received influx directly from God, as is hinted in many places of the same law, nevertheless Saturn is not excluded, since they themselves say they received the law from a place, or measure, of divinity: which is called twofold: to which Saturn corresponds, and the intelligence presiding over it. From which place flows rest, remission of sins, and that exuberance which jubi-

                            **H iij**

--- Page 259 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

The Jubilee is called, after the square of the number seven: which agrees with Saturn, the seventh planet. It was said in the second place concerning Thrones, that they are bound together by
[Marginal note: Iul. Fir.] truth and love. And concerning Saturn, that Firmicus Maternus [says] that he is tenacious: and makes his
[Marginal note: Alchabi.] Saturnians well-compacted: Whence they delight in silence and solitude (as Alchabitius
[Marginal note: Ptolem.] testifies). And they are of firm and solid counsel, as Ptolemy testifies: And they are of a most tenacious nature from that composition, therefore they eagerly gather and with difficulty dispense, and separated from society, and collected within themselves in silence, and with elevated intellect, they more keenly scrutinize the secrets of God and nature: so that with the Thrones they become living
[Marginal note: Democr. Plato. Ariſto. Auicena] seats of God. Whence the aforementioned Astronomers continue, and with them Democritus, Plato, Aristotle, and Avicenna, saying: Saturn favors high intellect, and a profound knowledge of things, a more secret Philosophy, and Theology: of which kind is that of the Hebrews: which savors of the influx of supramundane Saturn: And in this he is best equated with the thrones: in which a judge sitting ought to shine with intellect, knowledge of laws, stable speech, long foresight, and royal counsel: Rectitude is added, untainted faith, and agreement with the sitting Prince. And concerning Saturn it is said, that if he rules alone, troubled by no impediment, he gives most faithful friendship. Moreover, Thrones are called God-bearing, and pouring forth wisdom, and God-like dispositions. And Saturn is God-bearing, receiving divine inspirations: which he diffuses into his Saturnians. I will not omit what
[Marginal note: Ianus] antiquity relates about Saturn: that he taught Janus wisdom, and yielded a part of the kingdom to him, in this implying that the outflow of wisdom comes from Saturn: filled with which, one has the greatest part for obtaining a kingdom: and he diffused God-like dispositions in the times dedicated to him, therefore they are proclaimed most happy: and then was the
[Marginal note: Verſus] golden age, in which neither theft nor anything wrong was committed: There was no helmet, no sword, no use of a soldier: nor was it lawful under him to divide the field by boundary: nor for anyone to be oppressed by servitude: nor then was anyone troubled by the injury of war or famine:
[Marginal note: Macro. Nouius Mũmi. Maſuri. Mallius] Therefore, dedicated to him were (as Macrobius relates) solemn rites and sacrifices, which were called Saturnalia: which were celebrated for seven days. In confirmation of which, Novius and Mummius are cited: although Masurius and Mallius thought otherwise: Of whom the former consecrated only one day to him, the latter three: For its
[Marginal note: Cæſar Auguſt.] solemnity was for a day: But by Caesar first, afterwards by the decree of Augustus, it was extended up to a three-day festival: Moreover, the added celebration of the Sigillaria extended the public procession and joy of the religion to seven days. Indeed, the number seven is appropriately attributed to Saturn: who is the seventh planet: who signifies rest: to whom the seventh day is ascribed: which indicates the seventh millennium: in which (as John testifies) with the instigator of evils held in chains, mortals will rest, leading a tranquil life: Which, through the septenary year of rest, and through the great year of
[Marginal note: Leuitico.] Jubilee, after the squares of sevens, is sufficiently prefigured in Leviticus. And since Saturn strives to make his Saturnians God-like: he, indignant, those who with evil morals, by deeds more than by words, slander his good influence,

--- Page 260 ---
**TONVS QVARTVS. 61**

deservedly depresses, and chastises: as we see proven many times in the Hebrews:
Who, more than others, incomparably received the most divine abundances of the true Saturn.
From which the exulting Prophet says: He has not dealt thus with every nation: and his judgments [Marginal note: Dauid]
he has not made manifest to them. Hence also they were oppressed by servitude, captivity, and many
plagues so much more severely, the greater the gifts of the Prince and true Saturn they despised.
Another adaptation of Saturn follows, with the seventh order in the ascent of Angels.
Messahala and Alcabitius write that all planets are joined with him: but he, [Marginal note: Messa. Alcab.]
because he is supreme among all, is joined to none: thus also to the Saturnian religion (which,
however, belongs to the supramundane Saturn) all adhere, either according to the true fulfillment
of the mysteries contained in that divine law, or by imitating Moses, its lawgiver, like apes:
and boasting that they received from Apollo, Jupiter, Mercury, Minerva, the Nymph Egeria,
Vesta, and a good deity, what they stole from Moses. But the Law itself adheres to no one:
nor did it receive anything from anyone, except from God himself: And this Law, pregnant with the divine birth of the Gospel,
seems to be cast out as if barren: although it is held in the highest honor by those who think rightly:
because the Gospel does not abolish the Law itself: but fulfills it even to the smallest iota and tittle.
Thus all orders of Angels are joined with the Thrones to fulfill the judgments of God: but the Throne itself is joined to none.
For Seraphic love, zeal for truth and justice, concurs: Cherubic knowledge also intervenes: which arranges
degrees in distributive justice: and decrees retributions and scourges in retributive justice,
according to merits and misdeeds. Dominations are present, that is, freedom of mind (for thus [Marginal note: Diony.]
is domination declared by Dionysius) so that judgment may be pronounced free from affection and
passion. Virtues assist the judges: so that they may be manly and constant in pronouncing judgments.
Powers are at hand: so that they may execute the judgment pronounced, coercing (to use the words of Dionysius) [Marginal note: Idem]
all tyranny, and those abusing the strengths of their power. Principalities, Angels and Archangels,
presiding over Princes, particular men, and provinces, convene: so that they may approve and favor
the judgment and distribution brought forth by the judge. Nor do others take on the Thrones to fulfill
their offices: Not Seraphim to love: not Cherubim to understand: not Angels to announce: nor others
to execute those things to which their offices are appointed.

**Dominationum proprietates decem. Cap. VI.**

**C**um Saturnum (whom the ignorant call malevolent) with the most holy seats of God
we have made agree: where no concordance appeared: we will easily adapt Jupiter to the Dominations,
especially those things that are stated about both by their authors.
About Dominations, the great Dionysius writes this: I consider the manifest designation of the Holy Domination [Marginal note: Diony.]
to declare a certain absolute and anagogical ascent, free from all pedestrian diminishment: and into no tyrannical

**H v.**

--- Page 261 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

dissimilarity, in no way universally inclined to it; a liberally severe Dominion, placed above all diminishing servitude, superior to all subjection, and removed from all dissimilarity, and incessantly desiring dominion; and conforming itself and what is after it most excellently and beautifully to the virtue and likeness of that which naturally subsists, as much as possible; turned not to any who see vainly, but properly to the universal Being; and made always in participation of the Lord's Deiformity, as far as is possible for it. Thus far Dionysius.

Whose meaning is (as he himself states beforehand) to declare the names, or full denominations of the holy Dominions and mysteries. And the first of these is, that they have a certain absolute elevation, free from all crushing depression, which diminishes the dignity of the ruler. And secondly, their mind is free from all tyrannical dissimilarity, so that it feels no inclination towards it. And indeed, what could more properly be ascribed to tyranny than dissimilarity from true principality, since the latter rules by right, and the tyrant against right: The one strives to favor and uplift subjects; the other, however, to oppress and plunder: The one breathes truth, piety, munificence, justice, and clemency; the other squanders everything with lies, deceptions, impiety, avarice, cruelty: The one a certain divine image; the other a diabolical one. Therefore, the tyrant is dissimilar to the legitimate Prince, but much more so to God, whose place the Dominions hold. Thirdly, a true Dominion is liberal with severe equity, and freed from all servitude and diminishing service. Nor should anyone think that severity contradicts liberality, since severity is an equitable distribution without distorting affection, so that a judge relying on truth may be able to restrain insolence, and with due munificence honor the well-deserving. Which he cannot do unless he has a mind free from avarice, hatred, self-interest, and such things, which lead the mind into a servitude that diminishes from the right balance of justice. Hence so often the supreme Prince of all exclaims, commands, and protests to judges and those holding his place, that they should have hands free from all gifts, because gifts, having torn out the eyes of the mind, lead into the most miserable servitude. Hence, in the fourth place, it is inferred that the ruler is superior to all subjection, which may be contracted from gifts, blood, affinity, clientage, country, friendship, custom, ambition, or from wherever. Fifthly, it is added that Dominion is removed from all dissimilarity to the supreme Prince, who is truth itself:
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
But sin introduces this dissimilarity, by which one differs from the primal truth. Hence concerning the first rebel, the supreme doctor says: "That murderer did not stand in the truth from the beginning." But I think that 'slayer' could be more aptly translated than 'murderer,' because he was not then a slayer of man, but a slayer of himself. Nor is this word 'homicida' (murderer) in use among the Hebrews, in which idiom John wrote his Gospel, where those words are recited. Therefore, they are, and ought to be, so conformed to God that they may rightly be called Gods, just as it is said of them in Exodus: "You shall not revile gods," that is, judges. And there it commands the thief and the perjurer to be brought before the Gods, that is, judg-

--- Page 262 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 62

[Marginal note: Dauid] ...judges. And the Psalmist, when singing of such men, or of the Apostles appointed over the twelve tribes of Israel, says: "The mighty gods of the earth are greatly exalted."
Sixthly, it follows that they ought incessantly to desire dominion. Here, the weak might be offended: how can those holy intelligences be said to aspire to dominion with unwearied desire, when in this Church, of which that heavenly one is a type and exemplar, they are condemned by the supreme hierarch [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] Christ, who burn for pre-eminence? As it says in the Gospel, whose title is according to Luke: "The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those who have authority among them are called benefactors; but you are not to be so. Instead, whoever wishes to be great among you must be as a minister and a servant." To these, we will give a satisfactory answer by bringing forth a truth known to the wise: For the appetite for dominion and pre-eminence, since it is innate in nature, does not seem blameworthy. Nor can we immediately desire subjection and the lowest rank, just as we cannot extend our will [Marginal note: Augusti.] to pain; since pain (according to Augustine) arises from things we do not want. Thus, to desire the lowest things is against the instinct of nature, which is always drawn to greater and better things.
Hence, one who desires great things should be called not proud, but magnanimous, [Marginal note: Aristote. CHRI STVS.] if Aristotle teaches correctly in his Ethics. And if the appetite for pre-eminence were blameworthy, the supreme teacher Christ would not have proposed it as a reward to those who renounce earthly things, saying: "You will sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."
[Marginal note: Apocal] And again in the Apocalypse, to lead us to struggle and victory, he promises a high seat, saying: "To the one who conquers, I will grant to sit with me on my throne, just as I also conquered and sat down with my Father on his throne."
Therefore, the appetite itself is not to be blamed, but the wrong object: namely, when we wish to be exalted in these momentary things of our earthly pilgrimage with the loss of heavenly things, to which we ought to aspire. The manner is also to be blamed, presuming to obtain by one's own strength what ought to be acknowledged as coming from the giver of all good things.
Hence, he erred who said: "I will ascend to heaven; above the stars of God I will exalt my throne; I will sit on the mount of assembly in the far north; I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will make myself like the Most High." He commits as many sins as he utters words. He claims a higher seat for himself with no existing merits. Again, he wished to ascend a more eminent throne uncalled, when he ought to have sat in the lowest place until he heard the Prince saying: "Friend, go up higher." And he had decided to sit on the mount of assembly, on the northern side, from where the law was given, from where the insolent are punished, from where [Marginal note: Ieremi.] falls and many transgressions spring forth, according to that of Jeremiah: "From the north every evil will be unleashed."
Hence, he deservedly experienced the sentence and judgment of God, when he tried (though in vain) to place himself in the place of judgment. He again ambitiously sought to ascend above the height of the super-celestial clouds, from where all things are irrigated through God-bearing channels. And he had impiously thought to make himself like the Most High, to whom he was not even worthy to be a servant.
Hence, he became the lowest of all, and most remote from the Most High. If, therefore, he had wished to obtain the sublime degree of blessedness from the supreme dispenser, he would certainly have achieved it (as it pleases [Marginal note: Ansel. Bernar.] Anselm, Bernard, and other wise men), concerning whom, to God...

--- Page 263 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Indeed, we will discuss elsewhere. Therefore, to seek unceasingly with the holy Dominations the kingdom promised to us, nay, to desire that union with the Most High Father, [Marginal note: John] for which Christ prays in the Gospel titled according to John, saying: "I pray, Father, that just as I and you are one, so also these may be one in you," is not a sin, but a virtue. For that degree is good, and one arrives at it [Marginal note: Leviticus] through holiness: to which the highest Prince exhorts us, when he says in Leviticus: "Be holy, for I am holy." Hence, in the seventh place, it is added that with all efforts one should look towards the likeness of virtue naturally, and having subsistence from itself: [Marginal note: Boethius Plato] which belongs to the highest hierarch. Rightly (as Boethius, Plato, and other wise men teach) all things made by craft imitate their maker, as far as they can. But since the holy Dominations are bound by the bond of charity, they favor not only themselves, but all others according to the exigency of things: therefore, in the eighth place, it is added: "As much as possible, conforming themselves and those who are after them, most excellently and most beautifully with the most perfect." Would that all who seek leadership would observe this: for they would not be of pride, nor of envy, nor of injustice, nor of any crime, if they year

--- Page 264 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 63

generosity, except to the highest Prince: To whom, seventhly, let us always adhere, fully conformed to Him, Striving, eighthly, as much as we can, to lead everyone to that highest beauty and Deiformity. Towards Him, ninthly, let us direct the whole keenness of our mind and our works, So that, tenthly, not only conformed to Him, but having become the same, we may always enjoy His same beauty.

In what harmony Jupiter imitates all the same properties. Chapter VII.

[Decorative initial Q containing a figure] How harmoniously Jupiter obtains these attributes assigned to the Dominations, it will be easy to judge: if what the Astronomers state about him is true. For that Julius Maternus says, from Ptolemy's school: [Marginal note: Iul. Fir. Ptolm.] The significance of Jupiter is dignity of form, nobility of spirit, sound wisdom, and intellect: Then rights, laws, statutes, religion: Then piety, modesty, grace, faith, and whatever an excellent mind of a well-instructed man can conceive. All these things he effects, especially when he is in the Horoscope: or in his domiciles, or in his bounds, or in his exaltation, and in signs and places where, rejoicing in his connatural property, he receives favor: so that he may dispose (people) to those things which the Dominations enjoin by the command of the Prince. Also, being constituted in such places, he makes noble, illustrious, great, and distinguished governors, or prefects of cities: and, according to the measure of their nativity, good, modest, benevolent, joyful, and rich. And all these things (to speak physically) he effects from a hot and humid nature: rendering the temperament tractable from the humid; friendly from the blood; disposed to wisdom from the proportionate heat; generous from the abundant influx. Hence in him are piety, benevolence, faith, modesty, grace, and whatever pertains to what is just and right: for a well-tempered complexion easily disposes one to all good things. But if we wish to ascend higher, this influx is drawn from the Dominations, which dispose the soul, while the star (planet) only disposes the body: But God, as the primary cause, provides both the influx and the increase to all things. But let us come to agreement. It has been said of the Dominations that they are free from all earthly baseness: and of Jupiter, that he disposes to nobility of form. Who, I ask, ascends to a higher place, man or beast? Man or woman? Angel or man? He, indeed, who is more elegant in form, is worthily preferred to others. For among all living beings, it was said to man alone, who is more beautiful in form than all others: "Rule over the fish of the sea, the birds of the sky, and the beasts of the earth." [Marginal note: Genesis. Psalm.] And of the Prince of all it is said: "You are fairer than the sons of men." Nor is that form, which merely soothes bodily eyes, sought in those who are to predominate: But that which Paul earnestly desired in the Thessalonians, so that they might deservedly be leaders and princes of others, saying: [Marginal note: Paulus] "having become imitators of us, so that you might be a pattern to all believers." Of which form the Law boasted (as the Hebrews explain), or the Blessed Virgin, saying, as our people assert: "I am black, as far as outward appearance is concerned, [Marginal note: Cantic.] but beautiful in inner beauty:" If, however, both beauties coincide, a form more worthy of command will result. It is said in the second place concerning them (Dominations), that they are subject to no tyranny, injustice, or plunder. And concerning these (Jupiter's influence), it is inferred; Nobility

--- Page 265 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

[marginal note: uuena.] Nobility of the soul is the sole and unique virtue, as the Satirist says. Therefore, not he who shines by blood, riches, or power, but he who gleams with virtue is rightly called noble; concerning which nobility the wise man speaks when he says: Blessed is the land whose king is noble. Thus Moses,
[marginal note: Ecclesia.] instructed no less in moral discipline than in natural and divine, said in the repetition of the law: I took from your tribes wise men and nobles, and I appointed them as Princes, tribunes, captains of fifties, and captains of tens: But where in Deuteronomy we have "nobles," in Hebrew it is said, ידועים (iduuhim), that is, "known ones," namely, in virtue and goodness. Which is true nobility, and freedom removed from all tyranny and and impiety. Concerning those minds, it is said thirdly, that they have free dominion over themselves, trampling underfoot all things that lead away from God. For what is this, if not the due moderation of all things, which pertains to prudence and wisdom? And concerning the signification of this sixth heaven, it is said

--- Page 266 ---
VOLUME FOUR.                                                                      64

being united, are the same, filled with all goodness and perfection: And concerning the planet it is said: that it conduces to all things which the mind of a well-instructed man can conceive. Hence Pythagoras asserted Jupiter to be virtue, and harmony, and tempera- [Marginal note: Pythagoras.] ment of the soul, health, and every good: and therefore that all things stand by his favor and aid.

Concerning the three co-equalizations of the fire of Mars with the Virtues. Chapter VIII.

**T**hat we may treat of the harmony of the fifth order of the enneads themselves, let it [Marginal note: Dionysius.] please us to examine what our God-filled Dionysius teaches concerning the holy virtues. He says that it is a certain strong and immutable virility of the holy virtues in all operations according to their Deiformity, not weakly infirm for any reception of indwelling things, or of divine illuminations, but powerfully reduced to the imitation of God, not abandoning its Deiform motion through its own weakness, but firmly bearing itself into superessential and pontifical virtue, and made similar to the image of virtue itself (as far as is permitted): and indeed powerfully turned to it, as the principal virtue: but giving rise to a second virtue in a Deiform manner. Thus Dionysius: And before we proceed: we will endeavor to declare why this fifth order is called by the particular name of virtues, Although all angels are called virtues by the same Dionysius: and rightly so, since every operation requires an operative virtue. Therefore, since no order of angels, or particular intelligence, languishes in idleness: but all execute the commands of the prince: in each of them virtue is required: by which they can be denominated virtues. Therefore, to remove this difficulty, we will recall what has been said concerning the Seraphim, Cherubim, and other orders. For although the Seraphim understand: and all other spirits love: yet from love, by which they are most ardent, they are called Seraphim, that is, burning ones: And granted again, that all understand: yet the Cherubim are denominated from the fullness of knowledge. Thus also from the gift, by which it most flourishes, this order is called virtues, although all rejoice in their own virtue and their own fortitude. And here also pleases the opinion of Albert: [Marginal note: Albert.] that although superiors are adorned with nobler lineages, they yield to inferiors in this denomination. For presbyters, although they hold the rank of deacon, yet claim for themselves the name of Priest from a more dignified one. The same is true of Bishops, and Patriarchs, and the like. The Virtues therefore are denominated from the gift by which they most shine: Which gift is described as adorned with multiple properties: namely seven, which they receive from the supreme virtue: and two, by which they communicate themselves to inferiors. For this is proper to all ministers of God constituted in the hierarchy: that they communicate to inferiors what they receive from superiors. The first gift, therefore, is virility, and unshaken fortitude to conquer those things which are hostile to the supreme prince. This sacrament is wonderful, how that most happy supreme emperor in the kingdom of peace, where he broke powers, the bow, the shield, the sword, and war: and himself being true peace and the blessedness of all, still contends through his virtues and fights: and when that warrior, who had undertaken the Lord's battles, in his [Marginal note: David]

--- Page 267 ---
"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+"+

--- Page 268 ---
**TONE FOUR. 65**

The supreme Emperor acts through virtues, as through ministers: likewise he acts through Mars, as through an instrument: It is trivial that he favors all warriors, from his nature (to speak physically) always inflamed with fiery favor, so that he makes his Martials choleric, irascible, impetuous, strong, virile, and unshaken. Secondly, it follows concerning the holy virtues: that they undertake and perfect all their operations, as deifying and deiform, just like all other intelligences: which, having been made deiform, degenerate in nothing from that uniform and deifying beauty itself. Which Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, and whatever celestial instrument effects, in this praising the supreme craftsman, who made all things very good [Marginal note: David]. Hence the deiform lyre-player sings: Praise him, sun and moon: Praise him, stars and light, indeed both fixed and wandering stars, and the light of all of them in this most resounding theater praise the craftsman. Thirdly, it is sought: that they are in no way weak to draw in the influx of divine virtue: lest they succumb when their own strength fails: which tends to nothing, unless favor is continuously supplied from that supreme source for themselves, and for those whom they favor. Hence Moses helped the people fighting with the Amalekites with virtue, which he continuously drew in by praying with arms outstretched in a cross [Marginal note: Moses,]. Which Mars also provides with his fiery power: as Ptolemy [Marginal note: Ptolem.], Hermes [Marginal note: Hermes.], Firmicus [Marginal note: Iul Fir.], Alchabitius [Marginal note: Alcha.] and all astronomers agree, whence it is called Empyrois: For fiery power is indeficient: and operates without interruption. It is also always increasing, and receiving increment in proportion to the increase of matter: And that it may always operate as if defective in itself, so that it may always draw in, is necessary: Therefore Mars, together with the presiding virtues, must always imbibe from a higher virtue, so that they may always succor their own, over whom they preside in battle.

**How they still agree in six other properties. Chapter IX.**

[Decorative woodcut initial V] Further, Dionysius, progressing concerning the deifying virtues, says: that with strong powers they imitate God: and lead true soldiers, who fight for the kingdom of God, to Him: so that they may receive a crown in Him: because he will not be crowned (the heavenly trumpet sounds) unless he has fought lawfully [Marginal note: Dionysius]. And what is perfected through warlike virtues, is arranged through Mars, the signifier of war [Marginal note: Paul]: Which war, if we undertake it with right intention, is certainly good and holy: But if we commit it out of ambition, hatred, envy, and pride, it is certainly evil and diabolical. For if Mars (says Firmicus) [Marginal note: Iul. Fir.] is well disposed in the ninth house, with Jupiter favoring, and the house itself, and the Horoscopal irradiation, he makes people fortunate: and those who easily obtain all things. But what is "with Jupiter favoring," if not with the justice of war favoring, and the zeal of the Lord, for whom we must always fight? Fifthly, it is added, that they do not abandon the deiform work and the battle they have undertaken out of any weakness: lest they be driven from the kingdom and the military service, together with Saul, who fought not with the faith he ought to have. Sixthly, it is brought forward, that they are carried firmly and incessantly into the most powerful and superessential virtue, by which they can acquire for themselves the perfect image of the prince. And here is no- I

--- Page 269 ---
**CANTICI PRIMI**

stagnation, or repetition: but declares that they themselves always ascend to higher things: For first, they have manly constancy: Second, they perform every heavenly and God-like work: Third, lest they be weakened, they always draw from the supreme fount: Fourth, they have God before their eyes as an example: Fifth, they persevere in the work they have begun: Sixth, always tending towards the supreme hierarch, they acquire for themselves his complete likeness and image: To do this, they are turned towards God himself with all affection and all their strength: And thus, like most holy vessels filled with all charisms, in the eighth place they communicate virtue and strength to those inferiors entrusted to them: Finally, they strive with all diligence to make those whom they favor God-like: To all these things, the fiery element seems to dispose by its fiery power. And since five have been spoken of, let us proceed to the sixth. Fire (as our Dionysius [Marginal note: Diony.] testifies) always tends upwards, but Plotinus [Marginal note: Plotinus], going further, says: Fire, reaching up to heaven, since it cannot be sluggish, returns to other things, seeking its amplification everywhere. And since it cannot be carried downwards, nature resisting, it is most easily led and by natural attraction is drawn by the soul to life: so that through communion with superiors, acquired from a single life, it may make a transition into the highest things. If Plotinus transcends the bounds of philosophy or truth, let the readers judge. However, we hold this as constant, that fire always moves upwards: and seeks the highest rather than the lowest. What, I ask, could be said to be more fitting with the sixth property of virtues, by which they are always carried upwards, so that serving the heavenly beings, they strive to be transformed into their likeness: No less so with the seventh, by which, to do likewise, they are turned with all their strength towards God, just as fire, which always strives to transform upwards into the highest, not only itself, but all things it can ignite. But stones, earth, metals, and whatever things refuse to yield, it leaves in their lowliness. And what has been said of fire, Mars likewise accomplishes by his nature and fiery impulse, concerning which Ptolemy [Marginal note: Ptolem.], proceeding no less physically than mathematically in the first of his *Apotelesmata*, says: "The star of Mars dries and burns, and its heat is assimilated to fire." Hence, through the fiery properties accommodated to Mars, we have made them agree with the most holy virtues: from which, those whom Mars and the virtues favor are rendered ready and skillful for all things. But since good happens in one way, but evil in many ways: hence an impulse not moderated by any bridle of reason, not directed by any inner eye, rushes, like a wanton horse, into manifold precipices: tyranny, oppression, unjust homicides, thefts, robberies, immoderate wantonness, and other evils, which dabblers are accustomed to prognosticate with too broad a license through the signification of Mars: For this proceeds not from Mars, who merely provides the impulse, but from the soul badly regulating that impulse: But if it is well regulated, Mars (Mauors) is rendered stronger and more powerful with fiery or Herculean vigor: whom the wise (especially Boethius) celebrate in their songs, and here, having been celebrated, he exhorts us to imitate him, adding:

--- Page 270 ---
VOLUME FOUR. 66

Go now, brave ones, where a higher exemplary path leads; why do you, being inert, expose your backs, when the earth, once overcome, grants stars? To achieve these things, among natural gifts, choleric fervor is required: Among celestial things, the favor of Mars: Among supercelestial things, the vigor of virtues: Among divine things, the grace of God, or the inflammation of spiritual fire: By which the saints were made strong in war: they conquered kingdoms: they wrought righteousness: they obtained promises: they stopped the mouths of lions: they quenched the violence of fire: they escaped the edge of the sword: they recovered from infirmity: they put to flight the armies of aliens, and other things, which Paul, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, mentions. [Paulus] Which he himself, as a true theologian, attributes to the fervor of faith: nevertheless, other suitable things also intervene.

Nor is Mars alone (as pure mathematicians opine) the cause, therefore so many errors boil forth in their prognostications: because, namely, they do not consider cooperating causes with the heavens, which their leader Ptolemy teaches should be considered. [Ptolem.] And because the conjunctions of stars, and their virtues, are not fully known by us, as is very well known to all wise people: hence also a certain judgment about their effects cannot be given, with the added freedom of will, by which we can reject many things, and accept many things according to our wish.

Nor should sharper minds be moved by the fact that the stars seem to provide complete life and form to plants and animals generated by putrefaction: and some of those forms appear good, some bad: so that they conclude that good and evil proceed from celestial influence. Into which heresy if they fall, they will easily be removed from it, if they consider (besides those things which we have adduced above) how absurd it is for any turbid things to emanate from those most limpid fountains of celestial or supercelestial waters.

And concerning this Mars, Ptolemy in the third book of his Apotelesmatics decrees: [Idem] that if it alone presides over the disposition of the soul, the native will be most strong and powerful: But if it is badly disposed, he attributes this not to the sidereal influx, but to repugnant qualities arising from a certain antiparastasis of influxes. But (to speak more accurately) this arises from a badly disposed subject: just as medicines, the best wines, and more delicate foods harm those who are unwell. And concerning such matters, Iamblichus draws these things from the columns, or storehouses, of the great Trismegistus: [Iamblic.] [Trism.] All celestial influxes are good and beneficial, as they themselves receive only the good: And acting thus, they are immutable in their eternal gaze: although operating in mutable nature itself, they degenerate, yet in perpetual order they are always beneficial: Therefore, from the flow of heaven into matter full of discords, something dissonant sometimes results, yet the celestial powers remain always good. Therefore, a harmful quality on earth is different from the celestial influx, which, while it exists in itself, and is influenced by the Giver of good things, is good as long as it reaches the lowest parts, as if in the first degree. Secondly, when it is received in a viler subject: it itself becomes vile. Thirdly, because of the diverse nature of the recipient, it is received in diverse ways. Fourthly, by qualities differing among themselves in the same subject, it itself is varied. Fifthly

--- Page 271 ---
CANTICLE THE FIRST

the recipient enduring, it suffers. Sixth, from all things comprehended in the subject, something else finally results. Therefore, celestial and immaterial influences, which extend themselves into the containing power of Saturn and the moving power of Mars, frequently cause harm by accident: The former, when it is received in colder matter: the latter, however, when in hotter. Which entirely happens according to the disposition of the matter: For the Sun, although it seems to offend some with its heat and light, is nevertheless necessary for life: similarly, all celestial influences come as salutary, although either the perversity of the subject receives them perversely, or weakness cannot easily tolerate the efficacy of the superiors. All movements contribute to all, even the smallest parts of it: although meanwhile the smallest particles may be affected by this or that movement, or may not easily receive it, just as in a dance, while individuals dance harmonically and their gestures agree with each other and with the whole chorus: yet a finger and a foot are struck and pressed: And if anything weak has moved, it is ruined. Thus he.
    The Sun, a great melody, agreeing in eight with the powers, renders as it were a diapason.
                                                                                                     Cap. X.

**A**nd so that we may make the most holy powers agree with the king of the planets, it must be seen what Dionysius teaches about them. Of these (he says) holy powers, the equally powerful, well-ordered, and unconfused arrangement of divine dominations and virtues regarding divine receptions, And the ordered power of the supermundane and intellectual. Nor tyrannically precipitated into those things which are inferior by their virtues of power. But powerfully led back into the divine, after well-ordered things, and after it, leading back in a deiform manner, and assimilated to the powerful causal power (as far as is right), and revealing it (as is possible for angels) in well-ordered ranks through its powerful virtue. Thus Dionysius. Among the principles of whose discourse he includes the most worthy privilege of the holy powers, that they are those who restrain all evils, and at the same time, evil-doers.
[Marginal note: Grego.] Which Gregory and Bernard openly relate, of whom the former says: Powers are called those Angels who have received this more powerfully than others in their order: so that adverse virtues may be subject to their dominion: by whose power they are restrained, lest they be able to oppress or overshadow the hearts of men.
[Marginal note: Bernard] The latter, however, says: Those spirits who are named Powers, while delighting to magnify the divine power of our crucified one, reaching it everywhere: from this they receive power to disturb the forces of demons and men for the righteous, who inherit salvation. All of which Dionysius touches upon in that he says they shine with the gifts of divine dominations and virtues: by which they can restrain rebellious virtues and powers. Nor is there confusion of the celestial orders: because the gifts of one are communicated to another: For just as all love and understand: yet two supreme orders are adorned with this particular privilege, so that one is called the order of lovers, and the other of intelligent ones. No less do all angels oppose evils, and fighting against them, resist them: nevertheless, the fight is particularly assigned to the Virtues, and resistance to evils by a certain authority to the Powers.

--- Page 272 ---
TONVS QVARTVS. 67

is attributed: All these things we observe in the lower Republic, which bears the type of that super-celestial one. For in this one, the king commands, soldiers fight, and the powers, or praetors, suppress crimes: they restrain rebels, and resist evils with the moderation of justice. In the higher republic too, the emperor commands: the Seraphim are the household and familiars, the Cherubim are the wise moderators, and the Thrones are the assessors; the Virtues fighting under Prince Michael suppress evils and put to flight the darkness of the wicked. There are Powers shining with the sun, and truly favoring the Sun, who said: "All power is given unto me in heaven, and in earth:" Which, free from all envy, He communicated to His more secret friends, saying: "Behold, I have given you power to tread on serpents, and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy."
<br/> [Marginal note: CHRIST.]
He also gives power, that they may become sons of God: And this through the light, which illuminates every man who wishes to be illuminated, and does not oppose the darkness of sins, or the gloom of dark powers. Hence the order of Powers sweetly agrees with the true Sun, illuminating all things: of whom it was said: "God made the sun, that it might have power over the day." But returning to the sidereal sun, it thrives here with the fervor of Mars, and the benignity of Jupiter: thus the Powers are filled with the strength of virtues, and the rectitude of dominations: And the Powers put to flight dark demons: lest they inflict harm on the elect: just as the sun puts to flight the darkness of night, and all dark things, as we read in Job, "When the dawn suddenly appears, they consider it the shadow of death."
<br/> [Marginal note: Job. David]
And David, when speaking of the lion cubs seeking permission from Elohim to devour, adds, "The sun has risen, and they are gathered, and will lie down in their dens." When these are put to flight, it follows, "Man will go out to his work." The Powers are said to assist the true crucified Sun with such fidelity, that they strive to subject all things to Him. And this sun (the sidereal sun) responds to the supreme Sun with such consonance, that Plato calls it the visible son of the highest good, not indeed the first, but the second, through whom we may arrive at the knowledge of the first.
<br/> [Marginal note: Plato.]
We will leave the declaration of all other congruities of both suns for elsewhere.
<br/> [Marginal note: Diony. Iamblic.]
For Dionysius, along with certain Platonists, calls this sun which we see a clear statue of God: But Iamblichus calls it an image of divine intelligence.

Secondly, it follows concerning the order of Powers, how well adorned and unconfused it is. And the sun, the ornament of all, sits like a king in the midst of the wandering stars, adorning and beautifying all, and by whose course all are regulated and disposed, so much so that their movements are thence called diurnal or nocturnal, meridional or northern, eastern or western. The Powers are certainly ordained to receive from God, from which they dispose of lower things. And our sun is ordained to the first (principle), so that from it, it may receive light and virtue, by which it may illuminate and vivify other things; whence the sun is called the father of life.

Thirdly, it follows that their order is of supramundane and deifying power, as Hugo explains.
<br/> [Marginal note: Hugo]
But (unless I am mistaken) they are an ordered image of the deifying empire, and not the order itself, since lower things do not order higher things, but bear their image. The sun also among
I iij

--- Page 273 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

The Sun also, among all stars, is an image and statue of the highest prince: just as the powers are an image of the supramundane power: who is the Sun, and the true light of both the celestial and terrestrial world. Fourthly, it follows that they exercise power internally without any tyrannical impiety: so that we may be taught what kind of equity the highest prince demands from those who hold his place in the celestial and mundane republic. For concerning dominations and powers it is said: that they are without tyrannical force. And thus the former with just Jupiter, and the latter with the benevolent Sun most excellently agree: Both of whom dispose towards empires and dominions with equal favor: The former (to speak physically) from his well-tuned airy nature, and the latter from his tempered, and always benevolent warmth: Whence (as Ptolemy and Firmicus teach) from a moderate influx they dispose towards the most honorable reconciliation of men: strength of soul and body: great victory over all: highest expectation: and whatever seems to pertain to royal pomp. Its signification is also a principate not cruel, not difficult, not unjust: but most splendid from justice and beneficence. But what they add, that solar spirits are a little inflated with the spirit of pride, and desirous of honors: this could be referred to their magnanimity (which is commonly called pride): For the Sun and Phaethon decree their offspring to be just, good according to the quality of the dominations and powers to which they correspond: They also make (especially the Sun) clear in doctrine. Hence antiquity said that Phoebus, or Apollo, favors true philosophy and clear knowledge, which ought to flourish in a prince: Whence Plato teaches in proverbs that no one rules worthily unless they philosophize from a certain divine lot. Therefore, since the Sun decrees its solar (followers) to be mature in counsel, weighty in eloquence, zealous in justice: to what does it invite them, if not to celestial things by which they ought to be confirmed: so that they may agree, sixthly, with the powers, which lead the multitudes that are after them to the imitation of God?

But what is added, seventhly, concerning the powers, they agree so much with the Sun that nothing is more fitting: For they, as far as they can, strive to express the likeness of that potentific cause, from which they received power: And the Sun, a true statue of God and image of the supreme light, leads so much to the knowledge of God, that the Academics do not have anything by which they could more expressly teach that Deific nature, Whose essence reveals the Father, splendor the Son, heat the Holy Spirit, and whose beneficent virtue (reveals) God's munificence towards us. Hence the highest doctor taught the beneficent nature of the Father through the Sun, saying: "Be perfect as your heavenly Father: who makes his sun rise on the good and the bad." Most beautifully, in the eighth place, it is added that through the powers (by which all things can be governed with God's favor) is represented that Deific power, which Dionysius calls 'potentific,' that is, making his ministers powerful: If they burn, they are inflamed by that divine fire: If they know, they do so illuminated by the supreme light: If they judge others, this is by the authority of Him who said, "I will make you sit on my throne": If they rule, this is by the dominion granted by Him who said: "Rule..."
[Marginal notes: Ptolem. Iul. Fir., Plato, CHRI STVS., Diony.]

--- Page 274 ---
**TONE FOUR. 68**

...nate over the fish of the sea, and the birds of the sky: If they restrain enemies, let them remember that saying: "Without me you can do nothing:" If they exercise power, all power (says Paul, not ignorant of heavenly mysteries) is from the Lord God: who works all things in all.
[Marginal note: Paul]

**In five, principalities participate with Venus. Chapter XI.**

[Decorative initial 'D' in a square frame] The God-formed Dionysius continues concerning the heavenly principalities, saying:
[Marginal note: Diony.]
Indeed, the heavenly principalities manifest that principal, God-formingly educing [power]: And this, with sacred order, and most fitting principal virtues: And that they are universally converted to the super-principal principle: And to hierarchically lead others to that same [principle], as far as possible, to be formed as a principle of principles, and to manifest its super-essential ordination, and the adornment of principal virtues. Thus far Dionysius. And if all created things bear the image of God, yet diverse [things] represent various perfections according to the diverse charisms with which they are filled. Fire [represents] strength, and love: Water [represents] clemency, and piety: Air [represents] a subtle spirit: Earth [represents] the stability of essence. From composite things, man [represents] intrinsic operations, and all that is in God, rejoicing in His perfect image: The starry heaven [represents] multiple exemplars, or ideas: The Primum Mobile [represents] the first mover: Seraphim [represent] the fire of love: Cherubim [represent] scientific power: And so concerning each one. Hence, while Saturn bears the gravity of judgment, Jupiter [bears] most just presidency, Mars [bears] unshaken virtue, Sol (the Sun) refers to most clear empire: Venus, however, more particularly represents the beauty of Him, from whom all things become beautiful. Concerning which Socrates inquired of Hippias in Plato, he determines in Phaedrus and in Symposium, and with him Plotinus in his [work] "On Beauty".
[Marginal note: Socrates]
[Marginal note: Plotin. Academ. Stoici.]
Hence there is nothing beautiful (as the Academics and Stoics teach) except insofar as it participates in that Deific beauty: although the Peripatetics say that beauty consists in the consonance of all parts in the whole.
[Marginal note: Peripa.]
If they were to preserve that consonance, or beauty, received from the highest beautiful, they would certainly be most beautiful themselves: But because secondary causes, according to the condition of their lot, fall short of the first [cause], so that there are distinct degrees in them, from their weaker virtue, not being able to moderate the subject, they sometimes produce a deformed effect. To souls, however, who are endowed with their own free will (as the truth of the matter is, let those who wish to [do so] rave by their own will), when they more easily fail, many deformities are left in their morals: Which also happened to heavenly minds, before (as theologians say) they were consolidated in the grace of God.
[Marginal note: Theol.]
Nor is it surprising if we, being weak, do not conduct our operations in harmony with the highest exemplar, until through the ultimate bond of grace and love we are joined to that most beautiful [one]: But this is granted to minds, both angelic and human, only after battle and victory have been achieved. In this battle, however, mortals so greatly fall short of the highest beautiful and due consonance, that this worldly stage [is filled] with foulness,

**I iij**

--- Page 275 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

...they fill this worldly stage with foulnesses, turpitudes, all kinds of deformities, and clamors. Which, unless they were regulated by the supreme moderator, at some point such great horror would resound that we would feel the beginning of Tartarean confusion. But He restrains many evils and deformities through ministers whom we do not see with bodily eyes. And these are angels presiding over humans, or archangels who rule prelates or princes, or principalities,
[Margin: Diony. Hierot. Iambli. Daniel] to whom (as it pleases Dionysius, Hierotheus, and Iamblichus) provinces have been entrusted.
But reserving the first ones in their proper place, let us bring forth what was said concerning the principalities to Daniel, praying for the redemption of the captive people, by the archangel Gabriel: "I would have come
[Margin: Grego.] to you from the beginning of your prayer, as I had decreed, but the prince of the kingdom of the Persians resisted me for twenty-one days." Which resistance (as Gregory understands) did not proceed from an altercation, but from the heaven of the people entrusted to him, it procured a delay for Daniel, and relig

--- Page 276 ---
Here is the English translation of the provided Latin text, preserving formatting and paragraph breaks, and maintaining continuity. Please note that the Latin text provided for the continuation page is highly fragmented, making a complete and coherent translation of that section impossible.

**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

They fill [it] with turpitudes, all kinds of deformities, and noises: Which, unless they were regulated by the supreme moderator, sometimes such great horror would resound that we would feel the beginning of Tartarean confusion. But many evils and deformities He restrains through ministers, whom we do not see with bodily eyes. And these are angels presiding over men, or archangels who rule prelates or princes: or principalities,
[Margin: Diony. Hierot. Iambli. Daniel] to whom (as it pleases Dionysius, Hierotheus, and Iamblichus) provinces are entrusted.
But reserving the first in their place, let us bring forth what was said concerning the principalities to Daniel, praying for the redemption of the captive people, by the archangel Gabriel: "I would have come
[Margin: Grego.] to you from the beginning of your prayer, as I had decreed: but the prince of the kingdom of the Persians resisted me for twenty-one days." Which resistance (as Gregory understands it) did not proceed from altercation, but from the heaven of the people entrusted to him, it procured a delay for Daniel, and relig[ion/ious matter/etc.]

***

[and]
Line 18: and clear

*Note: The Latin text provided for the continuation page is extremely fragmented, consisting only of the enclitic conjunction `;` (meaning 'and' or 'que') on its own line, and `clarumq;` (meaning 'and clear' or 'and famous') on Line 18. This makes it impossible to provide a coherent translation of the full page or to incorporate the other marginal notes and line-specific instructions mentioned in your prompt (e.g., for lines 1, 6, 16, 17, 25, 29, 31, 35, 36, 38, 40, and the catchword `I v.`), as the corresponding Latin text is missing.*

--- Page 277 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**
**By what song Mercury sings with the archangels. Chapter XII.**

[Marginal note: Diony.]
[Decorative initial A]pproaching the archangels, our Dionysius says: But the very virtue of the holy archangels is indeed equal in power to the celestial principalities: For their and the angels' hierarchy and disposition (as I said) is one: Indeed, there is no hierarchy unless it has primary, middle, and ultimate virtues. The holy order of Archangels, established in a communicative middle, embraces the extremes by a certain common and social right: For it communicates with the higher principalities and the holy angels: To the former, indeed, because it is especially directed to that supreme principality itself, and is formed in its image (as far as is right): and it unites and joins the angels by most orderly and invisible guidances: But in the archangels themselves resides the prophetic office: that they may hierarchically receive divine illuminations through the primary virtues: and announce them in a God-like manner to the angels: and manifest them to us through the angels, according to the sacred analogy of each illuminator. This is what our Dionysius says. He brings forth a most celebrated secret: that there is no hierarchy unless supreme, middle, and lowest virtues and charisms shine within it: so that every hierarchy, proceeding from the triune creator, is connected to three orders: and the whole multitude is distributed into three hierarchies: The first of these, always looking to God himself, serves Him immediately, namely, the Seraphim, Cherubim, and Thrones: The next, however, is for conferring God-like virtue upon us: which has been declared in the Dominions, Virtues, and Powers: But the last is dedicated to human disposition, so that man may be made God-like: And not only for leading provinces, princes, and particular men, as is trivial to all, but also for bringing certain more secret things into us: For the explanation of which we will approach the threefold return of the soul to God:
[Marginal note: Academ. Plotinus.] about which the Academics (Plotinus especially, drawn by I know not what spirit) diligently discuss. This return happens (as they say) through amatory music and philosophy. So that through music, by numbers and measures, we may be aroused to the melodious harmonies of the universe and the archetype: Through amatory love, we may be affected by the most beautiful modes: But through philosophy, aided by the benefit of reason and discourse, we abstract universal reasons: or (as the scholastics are accustomed to say) the quiddities of things. The first of these occurs through a certain sensible reason, by which we perceive the consonance of things: The second through concupiscible reason, by which we are affected by that perceived numerous consonance: The third, however, through intellectual reason, abstracting from all sensibles, by which steps, elevated and ascending to higher things, we lead the soul to the ideas of all beauty and consonance: Finally, to the Good itself and the Beautiful, to which all its ministers and instruments invite and attract. For Mercury impels us to number, Venus to love, but Phoebus to abstract contemplation: And sometimes the Moon, familiar to the Sun, performs his office, and claims for herself the name "Phoebe," called from Phoebus:
[Marginal note: Iul. firm. Mathe.] Which (as Firmicus and other mathematicians assert) makes cultivators of good arts, and of all things—

--- Page 278 ---
**VOLUME FOUR. 70**

...most diligent explorers of sublime things. But in supercelestial causes, and concerning the ministers of the supreme prince, the same things happen through this lowest hierarchy: for angels receive those freed from sensitive bonds and devoted to heavenly things: archangels, however, with their Mercury, present divine numbers for contemplation: which numbers follow abstraction from the senses, just as sensitive and vocal things precede. Principalities afterwards, who equally care for all things and arrange everything, introduce us to that supreme beauty, to which we truly ought to be drawn: To this tends that saying of Iamblichus, or rather, as I should better say, of Trismegistus, from whom Iamblichus says he wrote: [Iamblic. Trism.] angels free from the bonds of matter: archangels by their sound evoke upwards: principalities draw and unite to beauty itself by the force of love: And thus all ministers of the prince, most faithfully executing the duties entrusted to them, strive to lead all those under their care to the common prince: unless those committed to them resist. Hence, to one asking why the angels of the Persians, Chaldeans, and other nations did not lead those entrusted to them to the knowledge of the true God, Dionysius responds, saying: [Diony.] "We cannot accuse the Dominions or righteous and just Archangels if the nations entrusted to them have fallen to the worship of those who are falsely called Gods, but it must be imputed to those who, by their own customs, of their own accord deviated from the straight path leading to God:" The cause of such a pernicious error was self-love and pride. Hence, the same crime is sometimes imputed to the rebellious Hebrew people by the prophet saying: "You have rejected the knowledge of God: and you have walked after your own heart." Thus far Dionysius. And when they knew God himself, they scorned his paths. Therefore, the familiar angels, and those favoring them, say that which is written in Jeremiah: [Ierem.] "We have healed Babylon: and it is not healed: let us forsake her." And again, inflamed with the zeal of God, he exclaims against the proud Idumeans: "Your arrogance and the pride of your heart have deceived you." For our Dionysius teaches: [Diony.] that archangels with principalities and angels who are in the same hierarchy agree sufficiently, with a few exceptions: namely, that these (angels) hold the lowest places, while archangels hold the middle: Also, because archangels agree with both of them: but each of them (angels and principalities) only with the archangels: and because they relate to each other in a certain order according to 'below' and 'above': hence principalities illuminate archangels, and these (archangels) illuminate angels, as their prophets: And since this third order in ascending, namely that of the principalities, is as it were prophetic, it is not surprising if Paul was raised up [Paulus] to this third heaven: so that from there he might draw those things which he would teach the Gentiles, and princes, and the children of Israel: To which third supernal heaven all the prophets ascended, suckling from those sacred breasts, of which it is said in the Song of Songs: [Cantic.] "My beloved shall lie between my breasts." And again: "How beautiful are your breasts:" when, namely, they are full of milk: which is expressed through the principalities, and archangels, and angels: so that through them God may feed us: just as he fed that chosen Israelite family in a land flowing with milk and honey: And this is the proper office of a shepherd, to feed the flock entrusted to him: and to lead it with the torches of true doctrines

--- Page 279 ---
OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

to illuminate and to kindle. Hence, to the Apostles whom He set over the twelve tribes, and to the universal militant Church, the true Sun said: "You are the light of the world." And concerning John—
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
—who taught to direct the ways of the Lord and to make His paths straight, He said: "He was a burning and shining lamp." And just as a musician strives to bring all dissimilar strings and voices to a single sound, so archangels, with the image of the supreme prince, strive to conform and compose all things, so that they may be joined to Him in perfect union. So also Mercury labors to bring vocal, formal, or rational numbers
[Marginal note: Alchabitius.]
into the same consonance. Hence Alchabitius teaches that if Mercury is conjoined with Saturn, it determines the number by which lands or buildings are measured; if with Jupiter, to the number of psalm-singing; if with Mars, to the warlike number; if with Venus, to the number of strings, sounds, and pipes. Let these things be said according to the doctrine of those who understand only lower things. But if
[Marginal note: Hebrews.]
we wish to ascend higher, our Stilbon (whom the Hebrews call "Star" by antonomasia) leads to the composition of the rational number with the divine;
[Marginal note: Paul]
and teaches true concord and union with God, concerning which it is said: "He who is joined to the Lord becomes one spirit with Him." Therefore (if the more secret Hebrews rightly teach), Archangel Michael, the supracelestial priest, presides over Mercury. He, constituted over all souls to be received, strives to lead them into God with that consonance and harmony, by which, perpetually joined to Him, they may always burst forth into perpetual hymns and praises of that eternal majesty. And this is what Dionysius
[Marginal note: Dionysius.]
had predicted concerning him and the other archangels: that he unifies angels and all entrusted to him, in proportion as they are well adorned and disposed with virtues and merits, and are fit for that union with the supreme beautiful and most consonant unity, which admits no dissonance in its kingdom of peace and tranquility. And angels do this by a certain prophetic office, receiving illuminations through the primary virtues, and manifesting them to lower angels and to humans, more or less, according to the analogy of the recipients. For not all angels teach equally, but according to the capacity of each, as is written in the most celebrated book of the thirty-two paths among the more secret
[Marginal note: Theologians of the Hebrews. Aristotle.]
theologians of the Hebrews. This is also celebrated among the Peripatetics in that which is written concerning the soul: that agents act upon subjects according to their disposition. Good prelates imitate these archangels as true presidents and leaders, teaching the flock and directing them towards God to the best of their ability, and each one according to how they are disposed.

How finally the Moon is adapted with angels. Chapter XIII.
[Marginal note: Dionysius.]
Our Dionysius, finally coming to the angels, says: For the angels themselves (as we have said before) completely perfect all the dispositions of the celestial minds, according to what is to be perfected. Indeed, having an angelic property in their celestial essences, and being closer to us, angels are more aptly named than the former, inasmuch as they are concerned with more evident things; and more familiarly announcing divine things to us, they strive to adorn all our...

--- Page 280 ---
IONUS THE FOURTH. 71

dent. These few things about the inferior ministers, let nothing be lacking (in their account): Firstly, because they conclude, and complete the disposition of all celestial spirits, since they are the last: Secondly, because they are truly numbered among the angels: Thirdly, because they are more properly called angels, that is, messengers: because they are sent more frequently, and act more familiarly with us: Lastly, he concludes that almost all these worldly affairs are disposed by them.

Hence a little further down he adds. He set the highest boundaries of the nations, according to the number of the angels of God. [Marginal note: Deuter.] But if it is taken from Deuteronomy, our translation, together with the Hebrew truth, has: He established the boundaries of the peoples, according to the number of the sons of Israel. But Dionysius perhaps said "according to the number of angels": because by the true sons of Israel the elect are designated, according to that saying of the Savior: I have not come, except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, that is, of the elect. [Marginal note: CHRIST.] For the sheep to be placed on the right hand are the elect, who are finally to be transformed into angels, indeed into God himself, if

--- Page 281 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE.**

From their aspects (come) longer winters, strong and more lasting winds, and snows, and hail, and such things: which are discerned from the various fixed stars and wandering constellations; whether those effects proceed from them themselves, or from the presiding intelligences, or from God commanding, so that these may execute and those may signify, or act as instruments. But because Galen, in prognosticating illnesses
[Marginal note: Alchin.] and death resulting therefrom, and Alchindus, in administering medicines, potions, and pills, seem to observe the decrees of the Moon: let those not rejoice who know the luminaries only in common with irrational animals. For
both, together with the Moon, the executrix of those things which higher powers decree, also observe their decrees. There is also another effect by which the Moon can be called a planet more
[Marginal note: Ptolem.] than others: namely, frequent (as Ptolemy says) and varied change, as is evident in the dichotomy (half-moon) and full moon; because then sensible alterations occur, especially in the weak. And through the quarter revolutions of the sky, evident ebbs and flows of the sea appear.
However, in a square aspect with the Sun, because it loses strength, the increase and decrease of waters become weakest. Thus also the effects of angels are more strongly felt: who sometimes even show themselves visibly to souls well purified, as to the virgin Cecilia, and her husband Tiburtius, and Valerian her brother-in-law, purified by receiving baptism from Bishop Urban. Holy women also saw them, who had gathered anxiously at the tomb of Christ. An angel freed Peter from prison, who was so familiar to him that when he himself knocked at the door of Mary, the mother of John, after his liberation, and Rhoda, a maidservant, announced it to those present with great joy, some said: "It is his angel." From this, the angel's familiarity with Peter is inferred. An angel also spoke with John. He wrestled with Jacob. Three together dealt more familiarly with Abraham, eating, as it seemed, and announcing the most joyful birth of his wife, and the horrible destruction of Pentapolis.
[Marginal note: Hagar] And Abraham's domestic angel dealt very familiarly with Hagar, expelled
[Marginal note: Gideon.] by Sarah. Also, to Gideon, who was threshing wheat, the angel of the Lord was present, bestow-
[Marginal note: Manoah] ing strength upon him against the Midianites. He also taught Manoah and his wife most familiarly concerning the conception and birth of the strongest Samson, and concerning his life and holiness, and concerning the sacrifice to be offered to the Lord: Moreover, while they watched, he ascended into heaven with the flame
[Marginal note: Elijah] of the burnt offering. An angel twice roused Elijah in Beersheba, twice provided him with food, and in Horeb taught him whom he should anoint as kings over Israel and over the Assyrians, and whom he should appoint as his prophetic successor. The angel openly rebuked the weeping
[Marginal note: Judges] people in the Book of Judges, whose fathers he had liberated from Egypt with such solemnity, going before them, and led through the sea and the desert.
[Marginal note: Three youths.] He comforted the three youths in the furnace, providing the fiery flame as if it were a cool dew.
[Marginal note: Daniel Zechariah.] Gabriel speaks hidden mysteries with Daniel, and announces to Zechariah the conception of the great John. Also, performing a full embassy to the Queen of Heavens, and with a most celebrated message, he foretold the most salutary conception and birth of the Messiah. It would be long to recount all with whom angels had familiarity, but

--- Page 282 ---
**TONVS QVARTVS.**                                                                52

let us proceed concerning their condition. Dionysius concludes in the last place: that our affairs [marginal note: Diony:]
are disposed by that virtue and influx which they received from superiors. And
the Moon, gathering the influences of all superiors, agitates and disposes our body everywhere,
namely the head when it is in Aries, the neck in Taurus, and so on,
as is now evident to all: and astronomers widely attest to this. [marginal note: Astron:]
Therefore, it disposes the whole body, both externally and internally. For exposed limbs re-
veal the Moon's dispositions when touched by iron: namely when the Moon is in the signs
presiding over those limbs: But in its intestines there are manifest decrees: so that
medicines are seen to operate at its command: and sometimes to be taken in vain:
as Ptolemy writes: and it is proven by clear experience, for example, when [marginal note: Ptolem:]
the Moon meets with Jupiter, as if yielding to it, it scarcely operates at all. It is also pro-
ven to effect the same when joined to Venus: And what the Moon operates
only externally, the angels do the same in every man.

The earth again agrees with the Moon.                                        Chapter 14.

**A**bsoluta concordia primae, & secundae enneadis flectendus stilus
est ad conuenientiam elementorum cum coelis, & supracoelestibus
mentibus. Et primo est terra Lunae respondens multiplici conso-
nantia, Primo quia terra aquam attrahit, & imbibit: adeo ut salomon [marginal note: Salomon]
sapiens inter insaturabilia terram annumeret: quae nunquam satiatur aqua: sic
Luna perpetuo attractu aquam deducit, aliquando ascendere faciens, quando
uidelicet ipsa ab orizonte orientali ad medium coeli conscendit, & ab ipso me-
dio caelo descendens ad orizontem occidentalem ipsam aquam secum deducit
tanta ui, ut uideatur fugere à nobis. Cum iterum inde ad oppositum medij caeli
pergit, aquam secum deducit: Rursus rediens ad ipsum orizontem orientis a-
quas tanquã sibi pedisequas cõducit: Humores etiam in arboribus corporibusq́;
humanis excrescendo sursum trahit, decrescẽdo ad ima depellit. Conuenit se-
cundo in qualitatibus primis, frigido atque sicco: quibus terra actu, Luna ue-
rò uirtute referta est. Hinc nocua, hinc maligna immerito culpatur, cum be-
nefica sit: Imbibit enim ex natura sua terrea aquas illas caelestes, & affluxus
omnes: quos ex uicinitate sua nobis communicat. Ab aliis ergo planetis, maxi-
mè Sole recipit quod terrestribus impartitur. Hinc Plato in conuiuio dicit Lu [marginal note: Plato]
nam Solis, terraeq́ue participem. Est insuper uarietate singularis: undè modo
curuata est in cornua, modo aequa proportione diuisa, modo sinuata in orbem
consper sa est maculis, aliquando pleno orbe immensa, ac repente nulla, nunc in
aquilonem elata, nunc in austrum deiecta, Iã subiecta coitui breui dierum spa-
tio, & statim grauidatione plena, moxque parit conceptum. Terram igitur in
hac multigena uarietate sibi assimilat, quae nunc ornatu suo spoliata subfusca ap
paret: nunc herbis, floribusque depicta pulcherrima uidetur: Pars aliqua pe-
trosa, alia paludosa, macra alicubi, pinguissima alibi, depressa uallibus, elata
montibus, fertilis hic, alibi sterilis conspicitur: Pars conspersa uariis maculis,

--- Page 283 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

...part red, part black, part white, or brownish is seen: A tenacious portion is also found from it, and another barren and fluid one: Now again barren, now it receives the conjunction of stars, and in a short space, pregnant, brings forth offspring. Therefore, among the stars, the Moon rejoices, among the elements, the Earth, in multi-kind variety: by which they are also assimilated. Water resonates with Mercury and Saturn. Chapter XV.

**M**ercury's nature is so much more difficult to explain, as much as the star itself is more hidden: so much so that it is scarcely and rarely seen. But its power lies hidden: because easily taking on the nature of the planet to which it is conjoined, or of the sign in which it resides, it seems to operate not according to what is proper to itself, but as the executor of another. Hence Hermes, that is, inter-
[Marginal note: Ptolem. Idem]
preter is said of the offspring which other stars have conceived: For with the Sun (Ptolemy being witness) it dries up: with the Moon it cools: with Saturn it favors intelligence: as the same [Ptolemy] asserts elsewhere: With Mars in warlike matters (where audacity is sought) it provides genius: But mixed with Venus, it generates an androgyne or hermaphrodite,
[Marginal note: Antiqui.]
(as antiquity feigns) named from Hermes and Aphrodite: And this occurs when someone exercises the genius bestowed by Mercury in the wantonness of a second, that is, disordered Venus: And such are called effeminate in sacred scripture, using
[Marginal note: Plato]
the pledge of both sexes. Which Plato describes under another enigma: namely, man made from the Sun, Moon, and Earth, and that he has from the Sun, that he is male: from the Earth, feminine power: from the Moon, which participates in both, a mixed nature, so that he is Androgynous: Therefore, male and man, when truly adhering to the Sun, conceives from its face and brings forth a work worthy of God: But feminine, when she exercises only the work of an animal or an earthly body: But mixed, when, leaving the Sun and the supreme light, he combines natural light with an earthly animal: Hence such
[Marginal note: Idem]
is said by Plato to be cut into two parts, the better being left, and the worse being empty. Thus our Mercury, agreeing with rational discourse and favoring it, now turned to higher things, now to lower things, brings forth various effects. so much so that its complexion cannot be easily apprehended: It is nevertheless (if I am not mistaken) watery by nature. Hence
[Marginal note: Lucanus]
Lucan sings of it as the arbiter of the waves: Thus also the order of the planets requires: that after the earthly Moon, Mercury be watery: Venus airy: the Sun fiery. And again, Mars fiery: Jupiter airy: Saturn watery: the starry heaven earthly: the Primum Mobile fiery. In which order also the angelic minds succeed: For angels have an earthly nature with the Moon: Archangels a watery nature with Mercury: Principalities an airy nature with Venus: Powers a fiery nature with the Sun: Virtues again a fiery nature with Mars: Dominions an airy nature with Jupiter: Thrones a watery nature with Saturn: Cherubim an earthly nature with the firmament: Seraphim a fiery nature with the Primum Mobile: and with the archetype in fiery power they agree with the Holy Spirit: But Thrones with the Son, who is the supermundane water, concerning which of all philosophers and theologians,
[Marginal note: Moses.]
Moses, easily the chief, treats, when he separates the waters under the globe or curtain of the heavens from those which were above: Which are the angelic waters, God being witness.

--- Page 284 ---
VOLUME FOUR. 73

praising David: There is also the highest abundance of divine goodness, which, lest more than the degree and works of inferiors deserve should be poured out, that celestial container is interposed: in which, as if in a certain tribunal, it is judged how much of that water ought to be given to each. But Moses concealed such mysteries under a veil from those fathers and peoples, to whom all things happened in figure: From these manifold and most hidden sacraments, ancient philosophers and seers, extracting some outer layers, claimed many things for themselves: so much so that the wisdom of Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and others is believed to be that which emanated from the highest source, God, through Moses to mortals, so that Moses himself, and not Socrates (as Cicero writes), called wisdom from heaven, and was the first to commend it in public writings. [Marginal note: Cicero] But these things are explained more clearly by Christ and his followers, to whom he entrusted the same. And perhaps this water of saving wisdom will still be offered more widely to mortals, when all the higher ministers of God shall gather in the watery court of heaven, to whom from the supreme fount shall be given the power of opening those exalted channels, now closed because of unhappy times: indeed, because of the evil merits of those who, obscured by these worse things, and made unhappy darkness, cannot apprehend that supreme light and water: nor do they deserve it: May God command these channels to be opened by His clemency: because the face of the earth is now found in utmost aridity, and may He offer (water), as He offered to Moses: who is rightly said to have been taken from the waters: And may the Son of God pour forth that supreme water through ministers to be gathered into the watery chamber, just as He once offered such an abundance to the disciples, that rivers of living water might gush from their belly: whence a fountain springing up into eternal life might arise. But returning to our Mercury, he will have a watery nature: For just as this (water) by washing removes the covering stain, so that the naked form of the thing may appear: so that true interpreter Hermes removes the shell of a foreign idiom, the obscurity of enigmas and parables, or the difficulty of any hidden speech: And opening those things which are hidden in the secret recesses of God and nature, he offers naked truth to be contemplated. And so that with Mercury we may reveal something from the inner and divine storehouses, there is in the higher coordinations a supreme water: Which is called wisdom and the Son of God: The middle is piety, mercy, and peace: And the lower is a milky udder, which all the prophets sucked, and Paul together with others, to whom it was given to ascend to the third heaven, so that they might offer to those coverings: to whom it is permitted to know the mystery of the kingdom of God only in parables. Therefore Hermes has, that he may be wise, interpret, reveal from the supreme water, which says: No one knows the Father except the Son, and he to whom the Son wills to reveal Him: [Marginal note: CHRIST. The Same] And again: All things that I have heard from the Father, I have made known to you. Nor do we say that the star of Mercury does this, except insofar as it can operate either by disposing, or as an instrument of the presiding intelligence. Moreover, Mercury is named from merchandise, over which he presides: which are exchanged for the price of metals, which are watery: so that the merchandise itself may flow by elemental and celestial watery virtue.

K

--- Page 285 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Air with Jupiter and Venus resounds. **Chap. XVI.**

[Decorative initial A]er, to Venus, corresponds its nature (as we speak physically in the stars) humid and hot: Hence they dedicated aerial animals to her. And just as air and spirit couple and join things that are separated, so does that Venereal virtue. But the Academics teach with an open doctrine that there are two Venuses: one indeed ethereal, the other truly aerial: The superior one is pure, chaste, ordered, agreeing with Jupiter, connecting higher, divine, and spiritual things: The inferior one is disordered, slippery, varied, and lascivious, joining animals and things inferior to them. And concerning this Venus, so many obscene things are sung by poets: because she is the cause of all evils, just as the other (superior Venus) is the cause of all good things. Hence Augustine says: "Two Loves made two cities: the love of God, regulated and good, and the love of neighbors even to the contempt of self, made the city of God: But inverted love of self even to the contempt of God made the city of the devil." Whence the power of this star is called Venus by grammarians: because it comes to all things, evil, namely, and good: Which Orpheus sings in his hymns: "You generate (he says) all things whatsoever are in heaven and on earth, urging mortals and the immense race of wild beasts with the raging love-potions: And all things are filled with love: and nothing is empty of it, just as all things are filled with air, which fills the appetite of nature abhorring a vacuum." For by love (says Boethius) the heavens are joined: and the elements come together in composite things. By love animals cohabit: The city is preserved: and every Republic receives increase. By love God fashioned and governs the world: and the sum of all things that He requires from us is love itself. Divine love (says Dionysius) did not permit the king of all things to remain without offspring in himself: And just as by love He diffused Himself into all things outside Himself, so by love He delights to draw all things to Himself, especially man: in whom all things are contained: Therefore, with him united, all things will be united. And Dionysius concludes all these things from the mind of Hierotheus, saying: "Whether we speak of divine love, or angelic, or spiritual, or animal, or natural, let us understand it as a certain inherent and mingling virtue: which indeed moves superior things to the providence of inferior things: reconciles equals to social communion with each other: and finally admonishes all inferior things to turn towards better and higher things." And because love and Venus are sought in all things, therefore the Cypriots painted her with both sexes, indeed with a long beard and feminine clothing. And Aristophanes called her Aphroditon, not Aphrodite: because she is found in every sex and every soul. She is also called Lucifer, as if "light-bearing": namely, the light of the Sun, or bearing us to that light, therefore she is called Phosphoros: For love and the appetite for truth lead through all things, however arduous, so that we may attain truth itself. She is also called Hesperos, when she follows the Sun: because having obtained virtue, we are affected by no less love for it than before. But that which precedes is (as the poets imagine) the daughter of heaven and day, i.e., a small light and a new clear truth, which we seek: otherwise we would not be moved to seek it. But that which follows is the daughter of Jupiter and Dione, i.e., the daughter of humidity: which is ethereal and shining. But the poets imagine another

--- Page 286 ---
TONVS QVARTVS. 74

begotten from the private parts of heaven and the foam of the sea, and this one is polluted, born from foam and nourished by the dregs of the lower waters, as Macrobius says. [Macro. in margin] But revealing the truth, they say she was therefore begotten from the private parts of heaven because the appetite for generation is implanted in living beings from heaven. But she is polluted and defiled by disordered souls. Moreover, the good Venus is said to be drawn by very white swans, which signify purity in color and delights in song. And Herodotus writes that the rose, the sweetest among flowers, is dedicated to her [Hero. in margin]; among plants, indeed, especially the myrtle; among gems, the pearl; among birds, the dove. We will reserve the explanation of their correspondence for its proper place; now let us proceed concerning that which she has with the air. For we see that all things which have been said about the twofold Venus are found in the twofold air: namely, in this turbulent air and pure ether. For from here, it leads to offspring and marriages through the power of the spirit brooding over it: which

--- Page 287 ---
CANTICLE ONE

...provided that it restores itself. Heavenly fire puts to flight dark princes and their hosts, as sung in the psalms:
[Marginal note: Psalm] The Sun has risen, and they are gathered, and they will be placed in their chambers. And in Job it is said:
[Marginal note: Job] When they see the dawn, they consider it the shadow of death. And this lower [fire] also puts them to flight, so that it may serve as an ally. Hence, not without reason, the wisest founders of the nascent church ordered lights to be lit for the bodies of the dead, from which they should not be removed until, the sacred rites completed, they are committed to the sacred earth. And they taught that public prayers and psalmody should be performed with a light kindled: which God also, to whom these sacred rites are offered, requires, namely, that all sacrifices
[Marginal note: Pythag.] be offered by fire, and that fire always burn on the altar. Hence Pythagoras in his symbols: Do not speak of God without light. Which, however, others, and even we ourselves elsewhere, have interpreted according to analogy: for this lowest light-giving fire contributes to sacred rites, as does also the celestial, angelic, intellectual, and divine [fire]. But dark fire by no means [contributes], not infernal heat, not the burning of evil desire, not immoderate passion, not burnt-out understanding: for this dark fire consumes all things, fills all things with barrenness, so that no one can accomplish anything in that nocturnal flame. Hence some wished to interpret fire [as such]: because nothing is begotten by it. There is, however, a good and natural fire, heat giving life and fertility. For eggs are not changed into chicks, nor caterpillars or silkworms into chrysalises, nor do plants grow; nor are animals nourished and fostered, except by heat, whether superior, or animating, or elemental, which are in some way congenate by a certain analogy through a symbol. And fire is so fertile that it begets itself, and enables others to generate, not by heat alone, but by the power of light, which it draws from Him who said:
[Marginal note: CHRIST] I am the light of the world. And so that Moses might declare that all things were produced by the benefit of light,
[Marginal note: Moses. Plato] after matter was created (which he calls earth) covered in darkness, he said that light was immediately created: by which life and form would be given to all things, and by which (as Plato says) all things could be seen. This vigor of life is in that divine fire: which, called the spirit of life, incubating upon the face of the waters, bestowed life and forms upon all things, by which each thing, separated from another, might be discerned by observers. For neither from matter (as some suppose) is there (as they say) individuation or determination of a particular thing: but each thing is distinguished by its own singular form (as the more acute teach). But if we wish to look more acutely into whence this determination comes, it will be found that it proceeds from matter, form, and spirit: which is hinted at by the letters, vowel points, and accents of the sacred idiom, as is held in the most recondite mysteries of Hebrew theo-
[Marginal note: The same] logy. Plato, wishing to imitate these in Cratylus, fell short as much as the Greek idiom, a spurious offspring (so to speak) of the Hebrew language, falls short of that sacred and mysterious eloquence itself: in which, according to the properties of things, names were imposed by Adam, at God's command.

Stones sing in harmony with the heavens. Chapter XVIII.

**C**Since they have a mixed, multi-faceted nature, they do not easily agree with one heaven: especially because in each of the primary kinds, many subordinate kinds and species intervene, which [are] of diverse stars

--- Page 288 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 75

they partake of nature. For in the genus of stones there are diverse species: just as in metals, plants, and animals. And although stones are earthy, supported by a certain stability: and metals are fluid, and are liquefied by the power of fire, so that they seem to pass into a watery nature: In both, however, very diverse species are contained: and they agree not only with diverse planets, but also with fixed stars: Diamond with the head of Algol, garnet with the heart of the lion: And the magnet agrees with the tail of the bear: Emerald with the horn of the wing, achamee jasper: Sardonyx with the heart of Scorpio: chrysolite with the falling vulture. And many such things are discussed by Mercury, and by some more recent authors, perhaps to be more widely explained in their proper place. There are also many kinds of marbles: There is Theban marble, more lively than others, green, spotted, sprinkled with serpent spots: whence in Latin it is called Serpentinus, in Greek Ophites. And this is manifold, Lacedaemonian, Augustean, and Tiberian. Porphyry is red with intervening white spots, called Leucostictos, Basalt is of iron color and hardness. Onychites was found in Arabia in ancient times, afterwards in Germany. Alabastrites draws its origin from Thebes, Damascus, Carmania, India, and Asia: which they hollow out for unguent vessels, and crush when burnt for plasters. There is also Ligdinus of exceptional whiteness, Theban, interspersed with golden drops. Coral of black, white, and red color, which some call Pyrites. Simires, which they previously called Pyropaecilium: because it is varied with fiery flames. There is also Tuscan marble of snowy whiteness, and distinguished by various veins. Magnet of five kinds. Tasio, flint whetstone, tufa, and very many kinds, which are mentioned by Pliny, Albert, Vitruvius for making buildings [Marginal note: Plinius Albert. Vitruu.]. There are also many kinds of precious stones, which partake of diverse natures. If, however, we wish to reduce them from their common property to their one primary genus, assigning them to one element and one planet, we will say that they are earthy: and they agree with Mars, with Saturn underlying, from their harder and earthy nature, well cooked by fire, and so compacted that they live with a very subtle spirit: Nevertheless, they live, whence not undeservedly are they called living stones: yet enjoying life alone, deprived of reason, sense, and all movement, except for growth and alteration: For they grow and are altered by the heat of fire and sun. There is also in them an appetite for tending towards the center, either from gravity or from their own nature. And from their beneficial temperament with Jupiter: from weight, stickiness, and astringency with Saturn, from hardness with Mars, but from life with the Sun they agree. And if there is any grace in them, it is with Venus, from hidden virtue with Mercury, and from common benefit with the Moon.

Metals do the same, especially with Mars. Chapter XIX.

[Decorative initial M] etals also are of many kinds, but the seven more powerful ones are equated with the wandering stars (as is very common). Gold is deservedly compared to the sun (as Hierocles says) because it is mixed with no darkness: and because it ex- [Marginal note: Herocl.] ceeds all things that are akin to it, silver, bronze, tin, and such. And it alone among metals does not receive rust: just as the sun admits nothing obscure. Silver, and all silvery things, such as marcasite, and such, are subject to...
K iij

--- Page 289 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

are subject to the Moon: which, as much as it is distant from the Sun, so much is silver from gold. Tin to Jupiter: There are some, however, who attribute gold, silver, and all gilded things to it: Others, however, assign gold to Saturn by weight, but to the Sun by virtue: Tin, however, is proper to Jupiter: Bronze to Venus: indeed, red bronze, as some assert. All sulfurous things, and iron, agree with Mars. Lead with Saturn, as weight and color indicate: for all dark things are his. Quicksilver, however, with Mercury, who easily takes on the nature of the planet with which he is conjoined, or of the sign in which he travels: just as quicksilver itself, either by nature working, or by art assisting (as they say), is easily transmuted into another metal. And although all the heavens concur for the production of metals, the Sun nevertheless especially, containing the virtue of all planets, penetrates with its rays into the bowels of the earth, concocting and perfecting all metals: However, a particular planet aids its specific kind. Let it also be that all metals partake of a watery nature: and that each responds to the nature of its planet: they nevertheless seem to be under the dominion of Mars, as we are taught from the secrets of the supreme archetype: in whose northern part, which is called Geburah (גבורה) by the Hebrews and presides over Mars, it is placed: and this [Mars] it has as an instrument of its [Marginal note: Job] work, or an interpreter, or an executor of its offspring. Hence it is said in Job: From the north comes gold. Their intelligence, however, in the upper crater is Zamael, as [Marginal note: Hebrews] the Hebrews assert: or Typhon, as Orpheus says. In the lower crater, however, is He who [Marginal note: Orpheus] said: "I will place my seat in the north:" Who by the Savior [Marginal note: CHRIST] was called Mammon, the prince of this world and lord of riches: as He said in the Gospel, which is titled [Marginal note: CHRIST.] according to Matthew: "Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of iniquity." Which all interpret as riches and money, be it silver, gold, or bronze. Also in the Gospel of Luke He says: "No one can serve two masters." This Mammon in Jeremiah is called Amona (אמונא), that is, Amon minor: Which we have interpreted as the tumult of Alexandria: For he presided over the Egyptians, who were rich in silver and gold: therefore God, taking away his power through Moses, commanded the Hebrews to take for themselves gold, silver, and all precious vessels from the Egyptians themselves: which they would then offer in the sacred rites of the supreme prince, rightly ruling over all: By whose command Mammon was despoiled by the Israelite people, and weakened in power by Moses: so that he could not defend his Egyptians: Whence, the favor of the ruler being removed, the Egyptians fell with a fatal and sudden [Marginal note: Rome.] downfall. The Romans, however, not heeding the sacraments and the subordinate power of Mammon, in order to summon to themselves the lord of gold, dedicated a temple on the Aventine Mount to Jupiter Ammonius, that is, to the Ammonian God from Ammo, who is called Mammon: and not from sand, nor from Ammon the shepherd, as some think. And they worshipped him in the form of a ram (which is the house of Mars himself, or an instrument of exalted strength). [Marginal note: Hebrews] Which Ram rules over Egypt: as the wisest of the Hebrews assert: although others subject it to the Virgin. Therefore (as the Hebrews themselves continue), at the exodus of their fathers from Egypt, the firstborn of Memphis were killed: so that the crushed power which the prince afforded them might be demonstrated, and the first-

--- Page 290 ---
VOLUME FOUR. 76

born of the starry heaven. If we wish to understand these things according to anagogy, more sublime mysteries are included here, perhaps to be declared in their proper place. Why also were the firstborn sought by the liberator from those redeemed from that servitude: Who also commanded that a Ram be sacrificed for sin, [Marginal note: Ptolem.] namely the head of the northern triplicity: as Ptolemy teaches in the first book of his Tetrabiblos: from which quarter (Jeremiah being witness) all evil is opened. Thence that Hebrew people, having been rescued, made a true passage into the most celebrated worship of the living God. To whom it was often declared that they should no longer fear the signs of the heavens, like other nations: because, exempted from their powers, as a peculiar family subject to God alone, they should render due thanks to their liberator: from which Egyptian and northern tyrant, just as Moses rescued the Israelite people, so Messiah [Marginal note: CHRISTVS. Idem] rescued all humankind: so that he might say, "Now the prince of this world will be cast out." In which singular contest, joyful over the victory without sin, he again says: "For the prince of this world comes, and he has nothing in me, neither in the first, nor in the second war." For he waged the first for himself on the mountain of the desert: the second for us on the cross: In which, despoiling the principalities and northern powers and these powers of darkness, he led away the spoils, teaching us with great confidence not to care about gathering these inferior treasures: whose prince is Mammon: but that we should seek treasures in heaven: whose prince is He, in whom (as Paul says) are all hidden [Marginal note: Paulus] treasures. Into which treasures we ought to exchange these inferior riches. Up to this point we have proceeded, discussing metals and treasures: lest, by establishing these dregs and scum of true treasures as an idol for ourselves, we fall together with their prince, having lost the true treasures: in which we can be most fully rich.

Herbs respond to the heavens with a more vibrant sound, especially to Jupiter. Chapter XX.

[Decorative initial D containing a landscape scene]
Two things occur, both in herbs and in metals, worthy of no small investigation: namely, whence and how virtue is drawn from them. Not indeed from hot, cold, humid, and dry, as the Peripatetics [Marginal note: Peripate.] assert, easily excusing themselves from assigning the cause of effects and operations of things: For we prove a virtue in them exceeding all quality, whence they may benefit or harm. Nor are we content to depart from the theologians: who say, and truly, that this is implanted in them by God. It will be beautiful to somehow traverse by what means that power is infused into things, which the Hebrews call כח (coah). The Academics teach, together with Tris- [Marginal note: Hebræi. Academ. Trism. Hiarch. Philost. The. ho] megistus, and Hiarchas, prince of the Brahmans, hints in Philostratus, But in the more secret Theology of the Hebrews it is asserted everywhere, that all things which are under the lunar sphere, and in this world subject to generation and corruption, are of a better nature in the celestial world, more perfect in the intelligences, most perfect in the archetype: and that each one, in the same series, responds to the superior and the supreme according to its kind: and from them receives, from the heavens indeed that celestial force which they call the fifth essence, from the intelligences a spiritual and living vigor transcending all qualitative virtue, but from the archetype, through these intermediates, according to its degree, the original force of all perfection. Hence to the planets, to the fixed stars, hence to the intelli-

K iiii

--- Page 291 ---
OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

intelligences, and from them each thing can be aptly reduced to the archetype: From the series of which thing emanates all natural magic, and the more secret, and true philosophy. Hence the consonance of things in this manifold world, and a mystical understanding in explaining that which is not said by that which is written: Since it is our purpose to reveal this in the whole of our progress, now we will only generally survey how herbs agree with the heavens: just as we touched upon metals: Although each of these (metals) is led to its own planet (as we said), nevertheless it is reduced to Martian dominion, both in the heavens, and in angels, and in the archetype: thus herbs, in which there is a more benign spirit of life, agree with the air and aerial Jupiter in general: but in particular, each with its own planet and fixed star. For since stones are earthy, metals watery, plants, proceeding in a direct series, are proven to be aerial. The sign of this is: because they sprout, coalesce, and grow under the air: but deprived of air, they not only do not coalesce, but die. For herbs live and sprout under the benefit of God, Venus, and Jupiter, with the Sun nevertheless infusing a certain seminal force: For lower things draw animal force from the Sun, generative force from Venus, natural force from Jupiter, so called because it always helps. For any star, indeed all of them together, foster and strengthen natural forces in us less than Jupiter. Hence it is always auspicious to receive him: the Sun perhaps (as some please) is not always safe: because that immense vigor sometimes harms the weakness of the recipient. Therefore, because plants coalesce especially by the benefit of Venus and Jupiter, we say that they are aerial and Jovian, although each is subject to its own star: Hence some, from an excessive influx, tend towards a harmful poison. For these, however, Jupiter, indeed the supreme artificer, has prepared good antidotes: Therefore, herbs, nor the fruits of trees, nor their cultivation, have ever been forbidden for human use: For man was placed in the garden of delight, that he might eat of the fruits of the trees and cultivate them: although the matter ascends higher than it presents itself in the literal shell: from which place, man having been cast out, before and after the flood, and under both the Mosaic and Evangelical laws, the same vegetables were always permitted, except for those which, by some grave excess, became poisonous and harmful in their roots, stems, leaves, or fruits, thus rendering themselves to be avoided. But meats were not in use before the flood, indeed (as some assert) forbidden: But metals (by which treasure is stored in this pilgrimage) are denied in the Gospel: which are contained under the dominion of Mars (as we said): Thus the blood of animals, carrion preyed upon, torn by beaks, or claws, or teeth, and such things, which are Martian, and are forbidden on the left side in the law to those who are to be placed on the right: from which (lest we proceed further than is permitted) we have deemed it necessary to abstain.

Occentant zoophyta cum Saturno. [Marginal note]
Cap. XXI.

[Decorative initial A] Those who investigate the more secret origins of nature assert that animals which are born through putrefaction, in waters, on land, and in the ruins of buildings, are generated by the favor of Saturn: and are Saturnian. And although this from

--- Page 292 ---
**FOURTH TONE. 77.**

Those who investigate the more secret origins of nature assert that animals born through putrefaction, in waters, on land, and in the ruins of buildings, are generated by the favor of Saturn, and are Saturnian. And although this is attributed by some to the Sun, as if among the stars, from its beneficial heat, to the common parent of all, it has nevertheless been investigated with more subtle diligence, and asserted that this comes from Saturn: Who, feeling the virtue of the superior and contiguous heaven, if he cannot arrange or bring forth perfect animals, at least, as far as the nature of the star permits, the dregs of animals and imperfect things coalesce by his virtue, yet compared from the superior, indeed from the supermundane heaven, and from the presiding intelligence. For each planet has its own intelligence, and in divine matters its own measure: by whose rule it is regulated: and these are called the measures of the fabric. Saturn, therefore, is regulated by that measure (as is taught in Hebrew theology) [Marginal note: The. He.] where they say Elohim resides: who is introduced as the craftsman and commander in all the works of the six days. But since he falls short of the creative cause, and of every kind of instrument of the starry heaven, his virtue extends even to imperfect animals. Hence to him are attributed mice, worms, scorpions, and such things born from putrefaction: likewise oysters, sea sponges, shells, and things of this kind, which are called zoophytes by the Platonists. Hence perhaps antiquity, [Marginal note: Antiqui.] redolent of that primeval wisdom, feigned Saturn to be born from heaven: not to generate as a father, but with his virile parts cut off and cast into the sea, from there Venus was generated, that is, the generative force from heated moisture.

Animals sing in

--- Page 293 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Antiquity. These animals, since they are many and varied in nature, are deservedly placed in the eighth sphere: and true animals are subject to it: which is wandering in a threefold motion, and most diverse in the figures of its stars: Whose number, just as it is known to God alone, so are their effects concerning birds, animals, reptiles, fish, and plants: And even if we make them agree with Jupiter, nevertheless they are not deprived of the benefit of the star-bearing heaven. For the planets execute those things which the superior stars influence. Hence there is great harmony of each with its own sign, house, or triplicity, and particular stars: From which effects proceed no less than from the wandering ones, although they are attributed to these, as being nearer, and more distinct, and more manifest to mortals. And if we wished to ascend higher still, and to investigate more deeply the causes, origins, and forms of animals: perhaps we would prove that these do not proceed from the bosom of matter, as natural philosophers dream, but from elsewhere: Since not without reason is the production of animals repeated three times by [Marginal note: Moses.] Moses: Of which, first water, then Elohim, in the third place earth is introduced as the author. And repeating again, in the last place it concludes that Elohim made all those things. Nor must it be overlooked that a bird is introduced as produced from the waters upon the face of the heavens, and not under heaven, as our translation has it: For this was touched upon, so that it might be intimated to us that the images of both birds and animals were produced first above the heavens, before they sprouted forth on earth: so that their origin might be not from earth, but from heaven, and from super-mundane sources. Therefore, it was not without reason that we made animals agree with the superior heaven, which, even if they proceed with all other things from the author of all, nevertheless, they are fashioned through the star-bearing heaven, as if through a principal instrument. [Marginal note: Mathematicians.] Mathematicians also assert that in the *primum mobile* there are images of things and signs of greater power, according to which prognostics are made in nativities.

They echo the same things especially with the super-celestial world. Chapter XXIII.

**C**ontinuing from the first and one principle, it is necessary that all things depend on it and correspond to it. For concerning the Creator, it is written in Wisdom, that by the spirit of his understanding he embraces all power, he foresees all things, he contains all spirits of understanding: and remaining in himself, a unique power renews all things. By which spirit also he fills the entire orb of the earth, vivifying, uniting, and causing all things to resound, reaching all things from end to end, and disposing all things sweetly. Which things we defer to discuss more broadly in their proper place.

What things in particular agree with Saturn. Chapter XXIV.

**H**aving established the general agreement of things, let us run through how their species also agree with superior things: so that we may be able to receive from all sides, in what ways we may praise the Creator. And so that we may begin from the lower composite things, from the elements it (Saturn) has earth: Among stones, those that are black agree with Saturn: Onyx, ziazaa, as their color indicates, and their tingling effect on the wearer, especially when better spirits are lulled to sleep in dreams. And to it, together with Mercury and the tail of Scorpio, agrees chalcedony, as its sub-sapphire, dusky, and pale color indicates: and it has from good

--- Page 294 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 78

to Saturn, that it may expel fantastic illusions: preserve and bind together the body's strength: but from Mercury, that it may prevent hoarseness: and clarify the voice, especially the blacker one. Among minerals, it rules lead: It also subjects to itself jasper, and magnet, and camoinum. Among herbs, the serpentary corresponds to it and to the celestial Serpentarius. It also rules rue, cumin, hellebore, asafoetida, which the Greeks call Silphion: Likewise, opium, mandrake, and those things which are styptic. Among animals, it possesses the camel, pig, ape, bear, especially the black cat, mule, donkey: But birds, those which have long necks and coarse voices, cranes, ostriches, peacocks, and that kind: whence the poet sings of Argus transformed into a peacock: "The Saturnian bird receives these eyes on its feathers." [Marginal note: Ovid:] Moreover, serpents, scorpions, and creeping things in the earth, waters, and ruins of walls or roofs: such as mice, ants, and various worms. Among humors, it rules moist black bile, both native and adventitious, except for the burnt kind. Indeed, of colors, black, leaden, and livid follow it. Also, sour, sharper, and heavy tastes imitate its heavy nature. Likewise, those things which smell heavily. In seasons, however, it presides over autumn and winter, and over stronger and heavy winds. Likewise, to Indians and Ethiopians: as their color testifies. So also to dark, subterranean, and solitary places. Moreover, to fishponds, stagnant pools, and marshes, and dreadful places. Also to hidden treasures, and those acquired through long journeys and with difficulty. What it possesses in man, however, we will reserve for the harmony of both the greater and lesser worlds.

What harmonizes with Jupiter. Chapter XXV.
[Decorative initial E] From the elements (as we have said), Air corresponds to Jupiter, and all things in which it dominates: Tin among minerals, and things hot and moist: also all things pertaining to the nourishment and growth of life, especially those which are masculine: And those things which are found sweet and pleasant in odors and tastes. In all living beings, blood, and in this part, the changeable winds of the air, which strengthen the natural and vegetative heat of living beings: which are (as some prefer) principally northerly or septentrional: where fire resides, and that supreme vigor: which vivifies and strengthens without burning: But in my judgment, southerly winds correspond more aptly to Jupiter: and that to the supramundane south wind: concerning which it is said in the Canticles: [Marginal note: Canticles.] "Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out." Therefore, from the north wind it draws strengthening power: and from the south wind, beneficial temperament and abundance of all good things. Also, clear green colors, and those which strengthen, are dedicated to it: Whence, among stones, the green emerald, although elsewhere it may correspond to Mercury and Venus. All green gemstones, and valued saffron-colored ones, are dedicated to it, and some white ones, like crystal. But sapphire (is associated) with Jupiter and Saturn: but it has from Jupiter that it makes one charming: and resists envy and fraud: and makes one placable and desirous of peace: from Saturn, that it cools heat: and favors the understanding of hidden things and magic. But in higher things, it agrees with Alaiot, some (attribute) tutty to the same

--- Page 295 ---
FIRST CANTICLE

they assert is dedicated, although from the favor it grants to lights, it seems to be suited to luminaries. Among trees, the oak is primarily sung by poets as dedicated to him. Also ruled by him are the olive, and oil, and wheat, barley, raisins, egg yolks, white sugar, licorice, pheasants, partridges, and similar things most suitable to nature: and all things whose sweetness is manifest and subtle, and which have a slightly astringent and sharp taste, such as nuts, almonds, pine nuts, hazelnuts, pistachios, starches, bugloss, basil, white and red ben roots: Moreover, elecampane, spikenard, mace, manna, if only it is made firm by the virtue of myrobalan: which is entirely Jovial. To him, with Phoebus, are mastic and mint. But with Venus, rhubarb, which prevails against cholera, and expels it, just as Jupiter and Venus expel Martian impetus. Orpheus attributes storax to him. From flowers are the lily, and the violet. But from birds, the eagle especially, the emblem of emperors: who ought to administer the justice of true Jupiter with clemency to their subjects. Also hens, quails, and birds of temperate complexion. Among quadrupeds: elephants, sheep, lambs, and all tame animals: To him, with his fish, is subjected the second climate, and the regions existing therein, namely Lycia, Pamphylia, Phazania, Garamantica, Nasamonitis, and similar ones. If we wish to descend to human activities, he favors religious people, prelates, kings, judges who judge rightly: Hence, by the Hebrews, Jupiter is named צדק, that is, Zadic, which among us means 'just': and subsequently, he predominates over profits arising therefrom, and lawfully acquired. Some subject Arabs to Jupiter: because they are obedient, faithful, and of inviolable faith, clean, pure, desirous of kingdom, and their region, especially Arabia Felix, is sprinkled with various perfumes. Others, supported by Ptolemy, subject them to Mars: because they delight in living by plunder and rapine. But let these and Ptolemy think whatever they wish: In all Arabs who are truly Hagarenes, the voice of the oracle to Hagar holds true: that her son and all his posterity should pitch their tents beside his brothers, and his hand against all, and the hand of all against him: All of which is fulfilled to the letter up to this day. But returning to Jupiter, his is the spirit of life: which is found in all living things, and in this whole mundane animal, if it is permitted to call the world an animal. To lead this spirit, the Sun and Venus also intervene, for it arises from the Sun, and in an animal from the heart, which is solar. It is infused when Jupiter tempers the immense power of the Sun within himself. It overflows, flows forth, is transferred, propagates offspring, and expands itself to the pleasure of every sense, with Venus favoring.

What things receive strength from Mars. Cap. XXVI.
[I] We have already concluded that fire is dedicated to Mars: in the same way, all burnt and sharp things are suitable for him: pungent and bitter tastes that burn the tongue: such as castor, euphorbium, radish, and similar things. And colors: fiery, violet, and purple. From stones, amethyst is dedicated to Mars with Jupiter [Marginal note: Ptolem.] (Hermes being the author): And it has from Mars that it favors the capture of fe-

--- Page 296 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 79

wild beasts: and renders one victorious in battle with them: and makes one vigilant: and experienced: but from Jupiter, that it may increase good understanding, and an equitable mind: as we can learn from Aaron [Aaron Arthe.] and Artephius. To the same (planets) is subjected the multifaceted Jasper: Which has from Mars, that it may render one powerful: but from Jupiter, that it may expel fevers, and distemperatures: and induce an equitable constitution: and in the aforementioned (properties) it agrees with Alramet. Hellebore also corresponds to Mars and the head of Algol: And to both (as Hermes [Hermes] teaches) hellebore is equal. To Mars again (are attributed) euphorbium, ammoniac, laureola, napellus, scammony, and commonly hot poisonous things, from an overabundance of heat. Likewise cultivated or wild garlic (which Dioscorides calls ophioscorodum, or elaphoscorodum) onion, shallot, and all things of this kind: whose taste is said to be lachrymose (tear-inducing). [Disco.] Moreover, among animals, horses are pre-eminently suited for war, mules, goats, kids, wolves (as Augustine also testifies) [August.] leopards, wild asses, and commonly predatory animals: and also those hostile to man: such as flies, fleas, and the like: Also serpents and dragons that attack with venom. From minerals, indeed, glass, yellow bronze, and iron, masters of the oven, furnace, and mill, phlebotomists, surgeons, barbers, butchers, and all soldiers, who are commonly called "Mauortian" from Mars. From regions, Ptolemy [Ptolem.] subjects to Mars himself with Scorpio: Syria, Cappadocia, Metagonitis, Commagene, Mauretania, and Getulia. But with Aries: Britain, Galatia, Germania, Barfania, Coele-Syria, Idumaea, Judea. In particular, lands and warlike peoples. Also impetuous winds, especially those tending from the northern quarter towards the west, and all things impetuous and violent. Not indeed these things from the malice of the star thus decreeing, but from ill-moderated impulse: For the origin is from the celestial Mars, and also the supercelestial: but the disorder is from us who regulate poorly: hence to him are attributed spoils, rapine, plunder, depopulations, deceptions, and all abominable things which are perpetrated by violence and impulse. But if that force and impulse were moderated by the bridle of reason and laws: all these things would be justly directed.

Things that harmonize with the Sun, or Phoebus. Cap. XXVII.

**T**HE SUN holds the middle seat among the planets, as king of all, exceeding all in light, magnitude, virtue, and beauty, illuminates all: and consequently intervenes in arranging all inferior things. But those things which especially follow its motion, among the elements is fire, among metals is gold, and all gilded things: Consequently, those things which shine with the same color, both in flowers and in small stones, the carbuncle glowing at night, the stone which is called the Sun's eye, having the shape of a pupil: from which light shines forth. Chrysolite, topaz inclining to its golden color, hyacinth, ruby, balagius (spinel), and things of this kind filled with golden or reddish color. Panthaura, or Pantheus, so called because it resembles the spotted animal, the panther: For it has certain black, red, pale, green, rosy, purple, and varied markings: hence it contains (says Albertus) [Albertus] as many virtues as colors: and especially renders the bearer victorious: or whoever looks at it (as he says) at sunrise. And Aaron calls this evanthum

--- Page 297 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

lat: Others, however, [call it] Pantocreos, because it seems to contain all colors. Many herbs are brought back to the Sun, and through it to the star which is called Canicular by the Latins; whence the dog days, and hotter ones because of the conjunction of the sun with it. Which the Greeks call Sirion, from *sairan*, which means "I dry up," because then there is the greatest dryness; or from *sairein*, with alpha changed to epsilon, which means "to gape," because then it makes men and especially dogs gape. And it is placed in the middle of the sky, as [Marginal note: Aratus] Aratus, [Marginal note: Iginius] Iginius, and other mathematicians write. Among solar plants, experts enumerate Balsam, Palm, Cedar, Laurel, which repels poison and lightning, and from its solar heat fears not winter cold; with which also Phoebus's prophets are crowned. Hence all poets proclaim it dedicated to the Sun itself. Also the Ash, which by the same Phoebean virtue keeps poisons far away. Peony, as not only its virtue but also its name indicates, not indeed that which [Marginal note: Diosco.] Dioscorides calls Chelidonia or [Marginal note: Romani] Cratea, the Romans Fabium, [Marginal note: Galli] the Gauls Tona, [Marginal note: Aegypt.] the Egyptians Mothon; But that which [Marginal note: Gręci.] the Greeks call Glycisides, and [Marginal note: Theod.] Theodorus among us Dulcisida, and [Marginal note: Antiqui.] the Ancients called Ephialtion, as being very powerful against nocturnal oppressions of incubi and fauns. Also the [Marginal note: Theop.] Egyptian Lotus, which has round leaves and fruits; For (according to Theophrastus) there are many kinds of this plant, distinguished by flower, fruit, and stem; but we speak of that which [Marginal note: Cratiu.] Cratinus calls Stephane; Whose stems close at sunset and open at sunrise. From its seed, loaves are made by Egyptian shepherds, kneaded with water or milk; than which food they deny anything to be healthier; whence they are called Lotophagi. To the same also belong all herbs and flowers called Heliotropes, which close when the Sun departs, and conversely, open immediately when it returns, and continuously follow it. Moreover, its movement is followed by the citron tree; saffron, which is solar in all respects, although its scent is dedicated by astrologers to all graces. Also musk, amber, yellow honey, aromatic reed, aloes wood, cinnamon, pepper, clove, ginger, and other aromatics; Frankincense also, and marjoram, and those things in which there is a sharp taste mixed with sweetness; And also (according to [Marginal note: Orph.] Orpheus) Libamomana, which, pursuing his magic, he calls the Sun's Incense. Among Phoebean animals are, first, the Lion, king of beasts, so that not without reason the Sun increases its power in the sign of Leo. Among birds, however, is the Rooster, whom the Lion fears, since it is superior in the Phoebean order. For the same reason, [Marginal note: Procul.] says Proculus, an Apollonian demon, who sometimes appears in the form of a Lion, immediately flees when a rooster is presented. Also Phoebean are the swan, the goshawk, and the raven, as some believe; The hawk, as [Marginal note: Porphy.] Porphyrius states in *On the Mystical Theology of the Egyptians and Greeks*, because it is a symbol of light and spirit among them, and because it seeks higher and brighter places by flying. But among animals, after the Lion, is the Ram, in whose sign the Sun is exalted; the crocodile, and the sea-calf, which is also subject to the heart of the Lion; from whose hide a belt made relieves kidney pain and hoarseness, restoring Phoebean harmony to the throat, as has often been proven. It also mitigates the force of lightning. All these things reflect solar influences.

--- Page 298 ---
TONVS QVARTVS. 80

they grieve. The Egyptians were not ashamed to count even the Scarab, which is also called Cantharus, among the solar animals. This (animal), always rejoicing in both sexes, by depositing its generative fluid into dung, forms a ball, rolling it with its feet, (representing) the sky and the lunar month: or it awaits the conjunction of the Sun for generation. From the provinces, Ptolemy assigns to it (the Sun, associated with) Leo, Italy, especially Rome: Also Apulia, Sicily, Phoe- [Marginal note: Ptolem.] nicia, Chaldea, and Orchenia. From buildings, all magnificent ones, royal seats, thrones, great palaces, pulpits, theaters, and all royal things. It also has its day and hour, just like other planets, but it (the Sun) has the principal one, just as it rules the primary member among human limbs, namely the heart. But these things are reserved to be related more clearly in their proper place.

Things that delight with Venus. Chapter XXVIII.

[Large decorative initial V] Enus, mistress of coupling, has an affinity with all well-composed things: and with those whose taste is sweet and unctuous, and whose odor is delightful, and whose color tends towards whiteness. She delights in moist things: and increases strength: whence she claims waters rather than any other element for herself. From metals, saffron-colored bronze, and red (copper/bronze): From stones, Beryl is especially dedicated to her: which (says Aaron) makes the wearer cheerful: rich: magnificent: [Marginal note: Aaron] very prompt to union and conjugal love: It comforts the desolate: favors pregnant women: lest their offspring be contaminated. And water, in which it lies, removes sighs and all infirmities of the liver. Mixed with silver, however, it frees from leprosy, that is, Martian contagion. In these things, how beautifully they agree with Venus, it is very easy for one knowing its nature to judge. Chrysolite, however, favoring wisdom (as is asserted) and resisting foolishness, is said to belong to Venus and Mercury: Which (as Plotinus and other Platonists believe) bestows genius and an aptitude for the harmony of things: [Marginal note: Plotin. Platoni.] by which it also makes the mind desirous of understanding the things themselves that are harmonious, especially with the intervention of Phoebean vigor: which purges from material and coarser things. Emerald also corresponds to the same (Venus and Mercury), and to Jupiter (as we said): Hence (according to Aaron) it bestows the power of eloquence and grace: and is most pleasing to the eyes: And [Marginal note: Aaron] with the superior stars, Athimot Alaata. Also Sapphire, Carnelian, Lapis Lazuli, Coral, and all of beautiful and delightful color. From herbs, to Venus, that is, to Lucifer (the morning star), is given the rose; to Hesperus (the evening star), the myrtle. Also well-scented and sweet-smelling Thyme, Labdanum, Amber, Incenses. And with the Sun is given Musk and Sandalwood: but with Saturn, Coriander. Also sweet and delightful fruits: Figs, the Musa grape, which is a kind of fig, as some assert, sweet Pears, the Pomegranate, having its name from Punic Carthage, where it is most praised: whence poets feigned that the pomegranate was first sown in Cyprus by Venus. [Marginal note: Poëtę] Among birds, the dove is dedicated to her by common consent. Also the turtle-dove, which contains such an affinity with the dove, that in the purification of childbirth, either of them is commanded to be offered without distinction. Also the sparrow, which is given, by command of the law, for the purification of leprosy, indeed a Martian infirmity: against which nothing is more beneficial than Venusian things.

--- Page 299 ---
**CANTICI PRIMI**

Likewise, the wagtail, named by common people for its trembling tail. From regions,
[Marginal note: Ptolem.] Ptolemy assigns to it (Venus) with Libra: Bactria, Caspia, Syria, Thebes, Oaxis,
and the Troglodytic region. With Taurus: the Cyclades, the maritime regions of Asia Minor,
[Marginal note: Orph.] especially Cyprus, Parthia, Persia, and Media. Likewise (as Orpheus holds):
Azure shores, baths, dances, all soft feminine things, and easy mingling.
Hence she was called Aphrodite by the Greeks: because born from the foam of the sea, and mother
of Hymen, that is, the deity of weddings and union: Therefore from her proceed the faculties
which are from weddings and the love of women. She also presides over lighter music,
just as Mercury over moderate: and Jupiter and Sol over more serious. Likewise over all
pleasures dissolved and expanded into the circumference: just as Saturn over those constricted to
the center: and Jupiter and Sol over those mixed from both.
        Which resonate with Mercury.                                       Chapter XXIX.
[Large decorative initial M] Ercury moves the elements indistinctly, none singularly: For he is
an assistant to the star with which he is mixed: Therefore he
regulates the complexion of none, unless insofar as, joined with another, he assists it.
Similarly, no flavors, no colors, unless mixed, like those of the rainbow, and the peacock's
tail, and similar ones: or those which are ruled by the star to which he is connected.
Thus also he claims no sex for himself: but a mixed hermaphrodite, that is, or an androgyne.
In ages also he rules none: but that which is apt to be changed into
[Marginal note: Ptople.] another. From climates, some ascribe the fifth to him: but Ptolemy assigns to him
with Virgo: Greece, Achaia, Crete, Babylon, Mesopotamia, Assyria:
With Gemini, however: Hyrcania, Armenia, Mantiana, Cyrenaica, Marmarica,
and the lower region of Egypt. From minerals, his are quicksilver, and silver marcasite.
From stones, those which are of diverse colors, and of varied figure inherent from nature:
so that they appear painted: And many of this kind are Agates, Porphyry, and similar ones.
Likewise glass, and lac: and together with Venus and Jupiter, the emerald: but with Sol,
the topaz: which is said, by the power of Phoebus, to bestow grace upon those who wear it
among princes: and by Mercury, to heal the frenzied, and to render the fervent waves of the sea
tepid: and in higher matters, it agrees with Elpheta. Animals which are ruled by him are
sagacious and ingenious: such as foxes, and monkeys: although the latter is ruled by Saturn
for another reason. Likewise those which run swiftly: such as fawns, wild goats, stags with their
young, hares, which, enjoying both sexes, imitate their Hermes. Moreover, those which have an
easy familiarity with humans: such as dogs (according to some), especially the more domestic ones.
From birds, all those which are musical by nature: such as the goldfinch, fig-eater, millet-bird,
thus named from the foods they eat: Likewise the blackbird, thrush, lark, calandra lark, and similar ones.
Moreover, all ingenious ones: such as the parrot, magpie, porphyrio, and similar ones:
just as sagacious, acute, versatile men are called Mercurial. But from things born of the earth,
him follow small plants which are shorter and with minute leaves, and composed of mixed natures
and varied color.

--- Page 300 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 81

-sed: among which are used fumitory, pimpernel, parsley, marjoram, and the like. But in studies, it leads to those in which ingenuity is more subtly sought out. For it favors philosophy, the investigation of scriptures, the investigation of enigmas, metrical poetry, geometry, disputative arithmetic, sophistry, painting, sculpture, and all things in which figures and characters are to be formed. Moreover, it governs faculties arising from computations, enumerations, engravings, writings, and measurements. But it gathers many or few things according to the nature of the star to which it is conjoined: so that it may be a coadjutor (as we have said) and an interpreter of other planets and superior stars, and subtly penetrating into all things, it causes the virtue of all things, which it draws with itself, to penetrate into the subjects.

How all these things, with the Moon, bring about a perfected harmony of consonance. Chapter XXX.

[Decorative initial V] The Moon is not inappropriately called another Sun by some: because those things which the Sun generates above by masculine power, she, receiving the offspring of the Sun itself and of other planets, brings forth to the lower world near her. Therefore, her motion is observed above others, as if giving birth to the conception of all things: For from Mercury she receives the power mixing humors; from Venus, that which leads to suitable forms of generation; from Mars, strength and impetus; from Jupiter, natural spirit and the nourishment of all things; from Saturn, structure and stability: But from the Sun, which contains all-encompassing virtue (as Iamblichus, Julianus, Proculus, and very many others assert), all-encompassing offspring and light. [Marginal note: Iambl. i] [Marginal note: Iulianur. Procul.] All these things she variously unfolds according to her varied complexion, orbit, and diverse aspects, both with planets and with other stars: For in the first quarter, Peripatetics think she is hot and humid; in the second, hot and dry; in the third, cold and dry; in the fourth, cold and humid. Now she is in apogee, now depressed, now at the extreme of her epicycle she is distant from it: now full of light, now half, now barely seen, afterwards totally hidden: And now she is in conjunction with one planet, in sextile with another, and with that one in quadrature, or opposition. And this same (Moon) governs the head in Aries, the neck in Taurus, and so proceeding. Which we do not doubt she also does in the greater world, namely, governing diverse things placed in diverse signs, so that thus, being varied, she may always produce varied effects: and through frequent conjunctions with planets and other stars, having become the wife of all, she receives from them those things which, as the mother of all lower things, and a medium between both, namely the superior and inferior, she communicates to all these. Therefore, not without reason is she likened to that mother full of all graces: who bestows upon the lower beings, according to the disposition of the recipients, those things which she draws from the supernal founts through diverse channels: But returning to the Moon, and if she receives from all stars, she does so most especially from the Sun: to whom as often as she is conjoined, so often she is filled with offspring and vivifying virtue: which she infuses into the moistened and disposed lower things. From her also in the heavens begins to re-
L

--- Page 301 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

[Marginal note: Plato.] ...series of things: which Plato calls a chain: by which each thing, or cause connected to another, depends on it, until one arrives at the supreme cause of all, from which all things [come]. And this series also the lower things follow. For stones agree with herbs, and these with animals: but these with the heavens: and those with separate intelligences: and these with those divine properties, or attributes: concerning which we will discuss in their proper place. But for the present, let us come to those things (if there are any) which are particularly ruled by the Moon. And first, water, both of the sea and of rivers, as is manifest, follows its motion. So also all humid things, and humors of trees, and of animals, especially white ones: such as egg whites, fats, sweats, superfluities of bodies. And those things whose taste is somewhat salty and insipid: And white flowers, whose complexion is cold and humid. Of gems, if any [Marginal note: Varro.] are attributed to it, especially are pearls: which are generated from water in shells (Varro and experience being witnesses), particularly in the Ocean sea: Some, however, around the Thracian Bosphorus, and in Arcania, and Britain. For in all regions, although it carries out what the superior [powers] decree, nevertheless, Ptolemy particularly subjects to it, [Marginal note: Ptolem.] along with Cancer, Bithynia, Phrygia, Colchis, Numidia, Carchedonia, Africa, and Carthage. Of animals, although (as we have said) all follow the eighth heaven, nevertheless (Mercury, Timaeus Locrus, and other wise men bearing witness) some are Saturnian, some Jovial, others indeed [Marginal note: Mercu. Timæ.] Martial, Solar, Venereal, or Mercurial: and some are Lunar, and from some of these stars (as they themselves assert) their souls flow: They are (to speak more correctly) by the favor, or by means of one of those disposing matter, the soul is infused by the giver of forms. Among these Lunar animals (as I seem to see) are especially faithful dogs, and domestic above other living beings, just as the Moon is above other planets, although we have enumerated them among Mercurial animals according to the opinion of some. But we consider them Lunar themselves, not only because they are familiar, but from their varied nature, by which they excel both in love and in hatred. They are also varied in size, color, and manners above all animals. For some are faithful guardians, Others are greyhounds, Others are bird scouts, Others attack bulls, Others [attack] wolves, Others [attack] birds, Others [attack] strangers, Others offend no one: But they rejoice in all human companionship. Likewise, among Lunar things we can count the Chameleon: which, due to the variety of the object's color, seems to take on a new color, just as we prove the Moon takes on a varied nature, according to the variety of the sign in which it is found. From the crafts, they are commonly plebeian, and vulgar, and lowly, just as it (the Moon) is the lowest of all stars: yet it explains all the concepts of the superior [stars]: Therefore (as [Marginal note: Thebit.] Thebit teaches), if anyone wishes to capture the virtue of any star: let him take the stone and herb of that star: from which he desires to attract power: when the Moon approaches that star: or looks at the same with a trine or sextile aspect, as if without the Moon itself as a medium, we cannot attract the power of the superior [stars]. Hence we say that it introduces into the most consonant effects of all superior [stars]: and their harmony in these lower things...

--- Page 302 ---
**FOURTH TONE.                                                                    81**

to complete. And content with these for the present, we will omit many things: which could be said in particular about the Lunary herb, and many other things to be reduced to the Moon: which perhaps might seem too curious, or superstitious. However, let these few things be said insofar as what is asserted by the wise men cited, is subject to truth, and to the decree of Holy Mother Church: whose faith we profess.

        What things resonate in particular with certain particular
                stars. Chapter XXXI.

[Decorated initial N]ot content with the influence of the planets, those who desire to operate in natural things have also tried to attract the effluences of the stars, namely, of those whose knowledge they were able to attain. For we find in a particular treatise ascribed to Mercury, and among some more recent authors, that certain inferior things agree with certain major constellations/stars: and which seems to have a greater and more express force with inferior things: And they strive to connect all these things: so that the virtue and work may be more efficacious. For in the eighteenth degree of Taurus is the head of Algol Iou
                                                                                     Mercu.

--- Page 303 ---
CANTICLE THE FIRST

then conversely. And to it they dedicate Jasper and Plantain, to stop bleeding and expel fevers. In the fourth degree of Scorpio, Elpheia, Venereal and Martial: To this belong Topaz, Trefoil, Ivy, and Rosemary: which nevertheless pertains to something else than is commonly believed. And these make a man beloved by God and men, for reasons not known to many: Hence, not without reason was Rosemary in infrequent use for sacrifices in the old law: which in Hebrew they call אזוב Ezob: but from the proximity of our word they translated it as hyssop. In the third degree of Sagittarius is the heart of Scorpio, of a Martial nature, and standing by Jupiter, presiding over Sardonyx, Amethyst, long Aristolochia, Saffron, good color, a joyful spirit, wisdom, and the flight of demons. In the seventh degree of Capricorn, the falling vulture, of a nature too much tempered by Venus and Mercury: which possesses Chrysolite, Savory, Fumitory. In the sixteenth degree of Aquarius is the tail of Capricorn, Saturnian and Mercurial: To which belong Chalcedony, Marjoram, Catmint, which is called Calamint, similar to pennyroyal: Also grace in lawsuits, increase of riches, and the gift of safety.
[Marginal note: Hermes.] These few things from Hermes, which are as nothing compared to those that could be adduced in this matter: For virtue is in every herb and stone: but greater in the star implanted by nature: beyond which also, each inferior thing acquires much for itself from the superior, and especially from the presiding intelligences: but most of all from the supreme cause: to which all things, unique and perfect, respond in harmony, by which they always praise their maker with their hymns and their song, just as they are invited by the holy children singing in the Chaldean furnace: Bless the mountains and hills of the Lord, Bless all things growing on the earth: Bless the springs, seas, rivers, and all things that move in the waters: all birds of the sky, beasts and cattle, together with the children of men, and angels, let them praise their maker and Lord. How beautifully all these things are depicted in the ark, which Moses built by heavenly oracle. Chapter XXXII.

When a great burden was laid upon the shoulders of holy Moses by God, and human weakness was not hidden from him, he refused to undertake it: but God, having decided that he should lead the people out of Egypt, promised his angel for their guidance and protection: Not content with this, Moses, with great confidence, protested to God, saying: "Unless you come, I will not go": For he knew that God's presence was necessary for many things, hence, not content with the promised angel, nor with the power given for performing signs and wonders, he demanded God himself as leader, "Unless you (he said) go before us, do not make us ascend from this place." And again: "How shall we know that I and your people have found favor in your eyes, unless you come with us?" To him the Lord assented, saying: "Make me a sanctuary, and I will dwell in your midst": and this according to every likeness of the tabernacle, which I will show you, namely, of this earthly house, which is God's own dwelling: as He Himself testifies through the oracle of Isaiah in plain speech, when He says: "Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool." When He showed Moses the whole structure, He added: "See, and make it according to the pattern,"

--- Page 304 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 83

which was shown to you on the mountain. But since it would be too long to recount all the things demonstrated, which pertain to building the ark conformable to the world, we will run through some or a few. And first, the division, of which it is said: Its height, likewise [Exodus] and breadth shall have a cubit and a half. i.e., nine palms: For a cubit is divided into six palms: and a half into three: Which division, by means of the number nine, represents the nine heavens: Over which presides the empyrean, indeed of another and nobler material: And this is denoted by the golden covering: for the entire structure of the ark was of nobler material: which was commanded to be made from shittim wood, or cedar wood: which is the same according to Hebrew doctors: And that wood is (as some assert) what we call larch: although our translation has cedars for larch. There was also another threefold division of the entire structure: one part of which, defended by no roof or shade, was subjected to rains, snow, sun, heat, and cold: which signifies this structure subject to all change: Which not only clean men, but also unclean and profane men, and all kinds of animals inhabit: And in it, because of sacrifices and constant immolations, just as in this one, there was a perpetual vicissitude of life and death. The remaining two parts, both covered, and everywhere free from all foreign injury, just like both worlds, the celestial and the supercelestial, incapable of either injury or insult. Both likewise honored by the name of sanctity, and the more secret part, the Holy of Holies, the rest merely adorned with the title of holy: And this both signifies and represents the celestial world, where angels dwell: in whom after the fall of Lucifer (as our theology teaches) neither sin nor any stain is found. The supercelestial, however, is denoted by the interior and more secret place: into which come those who, truly made priests, have consecrated themselves as a living and pleasing sacrifice to God: so that they may deserve to be united with that very one: who is truly the Holy of Holies. And here (as I believe) is the true garden of delights, in which are planted and flourish all the chosen trees of Adonai, which the Heavenly Father planted, no longer to be uprooted by anyone: Over which presides, not without mystery, the cherubic power, just as by God's command they presided over the ark, which was placed in that spot which was called the Holy of Holies: but in this figurative sense, there were remissions and intimate conversations with God: There, however, in the true dwelling, for those who have entered, already expiated, there is perfect union with God himself, and full delight in every part. Seven golden lamps were also commanded to be made: which would represent the seven shining stars in their orbits. But also a candelabrum is named separately with three branches on each side, and with their cups, spheres, and flowers: Which signifies the Sun in the midst of the planets, having three planets on each side in spherical form: which, like cups and receiving vessels, receiving what flows from above, produce flowers by flowing down to the lower regions. And thus, that which was now numbered among the seven lamps, also separated, is said to have been made together with the adjacent stars: so that these may be understood to receive light from the Sun, and to arise in a certain way. It continues concerning the four curtains situated towards the four parts of the world: Which would represent all celestial and supercelestial dwellings: and although there are many in both houses,

L iij

--- Page 305 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

yet to the four quarters all their division is completed: But the eastern and western by fifty; the southern, however, and the northern are divided by the number one hundred: because from here retribution by a hundredfold, indeed a perfect number, and from there remission by fifty, a remissive number, occurs in the super-celestial tent: after whose pattern this was made. There were also curtains in the tents themselves with fifty openings: for which our translation has "loops": through which openings, as through channels and certain vessels, remissive influxes might be received. Also one altar in the middle of the tabernacle for burnt offering, fifteen cubits both in length and in width: And another for incense: Which was a cubit on each side: Another, however, a golden one, to the north: From where (as Job testifies) gold comes. Those two, however, placed in the middle, where the tree of life is, are said to be made of wood: so that through the burnt offering life lost through sin might be recovered: and through true incense man might ascend to where he tends. And that was completed by the number fifteen: as much as it renders the name Jah: Which we are more frequently commanded to praise, when "hallelujah" is said, that is, "praise Jah": Which is composed of ten and five: from which comes remission, as is clear to those who know. But that incense altar was completed by a cubit: because it may render the divine name in calculation, whatever it wishes, to express its effects, yet God himself is unique: to whom all prayers and offerings are offered: And who dwells in the true tabernacle: to [Marginal note: David] whom the prophet, sighing, said: Lord, who shall dwell in your tabernacle? And [Marginal note: CHRIST.] again: I will enter into the place of the wonderful tabernacle. Which, because it is divided into many mansions, Christ says there are more, when he says: Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of iniquity; that when you shall fail, they may receive you into everlasting tabernacles. Which nevertheless is one, embracing all things: Whose footstool and stool is this worldly tabernacle that we inhabit. After the image of both of which, with the greatest mysteries, both that by Moses and the temple by Solomon were built: but this was arranged and ordered by David: Whose image also this human tabernacle and temple bears: which, according to the Apostle, we are. But pursuing further the hidden mysteries of this tabernacle, attention must also be paid to the ten curtains of twenty-eight cubits: For this number contains three nines, exceeding them by one, and signifying that one to which all nines terminate: as we shall say immediately. Therefore, by the number ten, which embraces all lower numbers, the curtains are distributed: which veiled all things roundabout, and were completed by the twenty-eighth measure: so that all those things distributed by the Academics might be contained in their twenty-seventh number. The boards, however, signified the elements: from which all things consist: as the number and proportion of both indicates: For there were twenty, eight, and six. And from the elements, water is described by Timaeus Locrus in an icosahedral figure, that is, from twenty bases: and air as octahedral, i.e., of eight faces: earth, however, from six: and fire from four, Which were denoted by the twenty, eight, and six boards, placed at the four quarters of the world: In which there is a sesquialter proportion, two-

--- Page 306 ---
TONVS QVARTVS. 84

-pla sesquitertia, quincupla, tripla, sesquitertia dupla sesqualtera, such is the pro-
portion of the elements: as we touched upon before. This also must be noted: that
each board had two mortises: by which it was joined with two adjacent boards:
thus each element has two qualities: by which it is connected with two neighboring elements.
For earth is bound by coldness with water: but by dryness with fire.
The other elements agree in the same series. And just as each of the boards was supported by
double bases: so each element resides in a double world, namely, the corruptible,
and the incorruptible, and the celestial. Moreover, the boards were connected on both sides
by five bars, or phalanges: because in every composite, the elements are bound by a certain
quinary (group of five): which they not ineptly call the fifth essence.
But if one wishes to ascend higher: the more secret theologians of the Hebrews teach:
that all things are bound by ה, which signifies five: and is the seal of the Holy Spirit,
who is called the bond binding all things. Therefore, all things pertaining to the ta-
bernacle are said to be bound into one: yet dissoluble, and again connectable by the
Levitical ministers: just as all things which are in this lower world are now dissolved
by angelic ministers and the heavens: now by a certain vicissitude are again composed,
yet by the power of the supreme bond: so that the mundane tabernacle may always be one.
All other things pertaining to that tabernacle also signify some member of this mundane
temple, and consequently of the human (temple), even of that (tabernacle) about which
the Apostle says: "A tabernacle not made with hands," that is, "not of this crea-
tion." To which we are invited by this one made with hands: whose many other things,
which are touched upon there, we will reserve to be explained: when, by God's favor,
we come to the interpretations of the sacred scriptures.

With what great mystery all enneads converge in their tenth. Chapter XXXIII.

[Decorative initial N] Not without mystery does the maker of all things require from us the primary
and tenth portions of all things: namely, the first and the last:
since he himself is the beginning and end of all things: To which beginning we ought to offer
primary fruits: and to which end, tenths. For the number ten
is the end and completion of all numbers: beyond which neither ingenuity nor
any nation has devised: because no further (number) is given. And because the number ten
is a completion: therefore he not only requires the tenth of works and fruits produced by us:
but in the natural series and genealogy of men, by a more celebrated choice,
he wished to appropriate the number ten to himself. For Noah was the tenth from Adam:
and Abraham was the tenth from him: But Christ, most gracious of all,
according to the legal genealogy woven by Luke, is the tenth of the seventh denarius
(group of ten) starting from God: so that by the revolution of the ten and the seven,
by a more secret mystery, returning to God, he might bring others with him by leading them.
But in Matthew's natural texture, and according to the flesh, he is the sixty-third from God,
namely, after nine septenaries (groups of seven). For thus the Evangelists, who seem to disagree
(as Jerome, and Hierou. L iiij

--- Page 307 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

(As Augustine teaches) they agree: that Matthew namely describes the carnal, and Luke the legal genealogy. This also must be noted: that the tenth always partakes of a double nature: both of the number, of which it is the end, and of that, of which it is the beginning: For ten is the end of numbers, and the beginning of denarii: For when you reach ten, you say, one denarius, two denarii, and so on: as the Hebrew characters indicate in their numerical significations. Thus the tenth in each of the primary kinds partakes of both natures. For the first novenary, namely of corruptible things, terminates in man: who is composed of the incorruptible and the corruptible. But the novenary of the heavens terminates in the Empyrean heaven: which, because it is material, agrees with the heavens: but in the dignity of its matter, it has a symbol with higher things. Therefore, in the ark, which represented the structure of the heavens, the tenth portion, namely the covering, was made of gold: indeed, a different material from that of the whole ark: which was divided into nine parts (as we said a little earlier). Also, nine [Marginal note: Paulus] angelic orders terminate in Christ their king: who embraces both the nature of angels and of God: in whom also all things terminate: as the Apostle says: Because it pleased God, namely, to make all fullness dwell in him: and in him to reconcile, or to recapitulate all things: as the Greek text has it. These [Marginal note: Idem] things we will attempt to explain in the second volume (with divine grace assisting). And finally [Marginal note: Plato.] all things terminate in that true tenth, and first: concerning whom again the Apostle (says): And with him Plato in his letters: from whom are all things, in whom are all things, and through whom are all [Marginal note: Diony.] things: But the lower novenaries are united with Him through the middle ones, and the middle ones through the highest ones (according to Dionysius): to whom all praise and harmony is due.

--- Page 308 ---
**FIFTH TONE. 85**

[Decorative initial V] By what consonance the intervals of the first kinds may be filled.

Fifth Tone

Why that first description is made by Plato by the twenty-seventh number. Chapter One.

Which intervals of the same number can be filled, and which not. Chapter II.

Why this arrangement is reduced to larger numbers. Chapter III.

Why it is again reduced to the largest numbers. Chapter IIII.

Why in this kind of description Plato used the diatonic genus more than the chromatic and enharmonic. Chapter V.

By what wonderful artifice those three nines are contained in the first of all creatures, which the Hebrews call Metatron (מטטרון), which complete twenty-seven, namely, their cube. Chapter VI.

That the same number, and in the same order, is contained in higher things by a certain superexcellent virtue. Chapter VII.

That consonance in all things results from the unity of the first. Chapter VIII.

By what note the inscribed heptachord is suitable for the soul. Chapter IX.

How those three nines are found in man. Chapter X.

What those three proportions mean,

--- Page 309 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**
**WHY THE FIRST DESCRIPTION IS MADE BY PLATO WITH THE TWENTY-SEVENTH NUMBER. Chapter One.**

[Marginal note: Timaeus.]
[Decorative Initial O]f all Pythagoreans and Academics, it is most manifest that the world and the soul were first described by Timaeus of Locri, and afterwards by Plato, according to certain laws and musical proportions, as a kind of heptachord composed of seven limits, beginning from unity, doubling up to the cube of two, tripling up to the cube and solid of three: by which numbers and proportions it was believed that the fabric of the soul and of the whole world was arranged and completed, according to the records of Pythagoras. And this from the odd, as from the male; and from the even, as from the female: from which complex virtues all things are propagated. But they said that the work was terminated in the cube of each; because beyond the three dimensions, namely length, breadth, and depth, no further progress is given. Therefore, in these numbers and proportions, all the force of the active and passive is contained; and all consonance is gathered. Of these numbers,

[Marginal note: Adrastus. Calcidius.]
we will form a triangular figure (if we wish to follow Adrastus and Calcidius): At the vertex of this triangle, unity is placed: six other numbers divide the parts on either side. Indeed, on one side is the order of all the doubles; but on the other, the series of triples

[Marginal note: Porphyry. Severus. Proclus.]
is laid out. However, following Porphyry, Severus, and Proclus, we will arrange both sets of numbers in straight lines in a triple order from unity, | 1. 2. 4. 8. | Or mixed in the same line, as Proclus believes was Plato's intention | 3. 9. 27. | 1. 2. 3. 4. 8. 9. 27.

[Diagram: A triangle with the number '1' at the top vertex. The left side contains the numbers '2', '4', and '8' descending. The right side contains the numbers '3', '9', and '27' descending.]

**Which intervals of the same number can be filled, and which cannot. Chapter II.**

[Marginal note: The Same]
[Decorative Initial H]owever, of these numbers, or limits, some are filled; but some cannot be completed: especially that which is between one and two: since no mean lies between them, unless we wish to divide unity, as Proclus suggests. Therefore, the means are not well filled, nor are they harmonically joined, unless the numbers are increased, as we shall presently declare. However, between two and four, only the number three intervenes, with a sesquialtera proportion to the smaller number, and a subsesquitertia to the larger: hence, this interval also cannot be harmonically completed. Likewise, between four and eight, the number six lies, with the same diminished proportions for completing the harmony. On the other side, however, where there are odd numbers, between one and three are two, with a double proportion to one, and a sesquialtera to three. And between three and nine is six: from which, in the same way, to three is a double proportion, and to nine a sesqualtera. By the same rule, 18 occurs between 9 and 27. And up to this point extends the proportion of these numbers.

--- Page 310 ---
**FIFTH TONE. 86**
**Why this coordination is reduced to larger numbers. Chapter III.**

[Decorative initial E] And if in the number 27 all primary kinds of things, and some intermediate ones, are contained, yet not all: since there are no spaces in which those more important intervening kinds can be placed: Therefore another figure is assigned with the same limits, and the same proportion, but with a wider field and larger intervals to be filled. Therefore, in place of unity, the number six must be assumed, doubling through 12, 24, & 48; and tripling through 18, 54, & 162. In which figure all intervals are filled with their kinds: For the intermediate terms placed between 6 & 12 are 8 & 9, where 9 is exceeded and exceeds by an equal numerical portion: But 8 itself exceeds by the same part, and is exceeded by the extremes themselves. Hence we find unity and duality by multiplying numbers by six, receiving the aforesaid means: which the former number (system) could not do. And between 12 & 24 are 16 & 18; and between 24 & 48 are 32 & 34. Indeed, some of these means are harmonic; others are arithmetic and geometric: which nevertheless all pertain to harmony: For from the greater extreme to the lesser, the proportion is double: and it makes a diapason: But from the lesser extreme to the greater mean it is sesquialtera: and it makes a diapente: But from the same extreme to the lesser mean the proportion is sesquitertia: and it yields a diatessaron. And the same is true from the greater mean to the greater extreme. But it makes a diapente from the lesser mean to the greater extreme: But from the mean itself to the mean it is sesquioctava: and it makes a tone: From which the whole harmony resulting from tones is obtained: And in a similar way it is from the other side multiplied by triple, where the first extremes are 6 & 18, between which are the means 9 & 12. But other extremes are 18 & 54, between which are found the intervening means 27 & 36. Again there are 54 & 162, between which extremes fall 81 & 108: Which means correspond with the extremes, and among themselves, by the same proportion: by which the means between the doubled extremes agreed. And what geometric, arithmetic, and harmonic means are, from the many things that various authors have written, I will briefly add these few points. Indeed, the arithmetic mean is the proportion of excesses: the geometric, however, is the proportion of proportions: from both of which the harmonic results. And how they relate, we will imitate Proculus thus deriving it. Between 12 & 6, 9 itself is the mean, I say, according to the arithmetic mean: For in the number three, the excess is found, both of the greater to the mean, and of the mean to the lesser: Again, I take the difference of the extremes: which is 6 itself, and I multiply this with the lesser term: let it be 36 for me. I divide this by 18: which is made from the extremes themselves: and let the breadth of this comparison be duality: I add this to 6, and from this I have the resulting harmonic mean, 8 itself. For by whatever part the greater is exceeded by the greater itself: by the same part of the lesser it exceeds the lesser term itself: For it is separated by a third from 12, and it exceeds 6 itself by a third: Again, the interval and its

--- Page 311 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Let us set a triple proportion, as for example 18 and 6: combining these, I make 24: taking its half, namely 12, I have the arithmetic mean. But taking again the excess of 18 over 6, namely 12, I multiply it with the smaller term, namely 6, and then 72 results for me. I divide this by 24, which is composed from the extremes: the breadth of the whole composition, namely three, arises for me: I add this to the six itself: and I have found the harmonic mean, exceeding the smaller extreme by the same part by which it is exceeded by the larger extreme: By which rules he teaches all intervals to be filled, except for semitones and dieses. Others, however, define the harmonic mean in this way: indeed they take two terms, and a mean between them behaving thus, that just as the greater term relates to the smaller, so the excess of the greater to the mean, relates to the excess of the mean to the smaller term, such as these numbers 3, 4, 6. For there, from 6 to 3 is a double proportion: The same is the excess of 6 over 4, which is 2, to the excess of 3 over 2, which is one: And it gives me a double proportion: which is derived from the excess, as if from an arithmetic mean: and from the proportion, as if from a geometric mean. Proculus, however, imitating Timaeus and Plato, derives the harmonic mean from the arithmetic mean with a more renowned method, by which all intervals may be filled. And some wished to arrange all these things in a triangular figure thus. But if we wish to follow Proculus, Porphyrius, and Severus, we will arrange all things thus in the same line.

[Marginal notes:]
Proculus.
Timaeus.
Plato.

Proculus.
Porphyrius.
Severus.

[Diagram:]
[A lambda-shaped diagram with a decorative top and bottom. Inside and around the lambda are various numbers.]

Left side (descending):
8
9
12
16
18
24
32
36
48

Center (descending):
1
2  3
4  9
8  27

Right side (descending):
8
12
18
27
36
54
81
108
162

[To the right of the lambda is a vertical column of numbers within linked circles:]
6
8
9
12
16
18
24
27
32
36
48
54
81
108
162

--- Page 312 ---
TOMVS QVINTVS. 87

Why the coordination is again reduced to the largest numbers, to 384,
namely up to 10368. Chapter IIII.

[Marginal note: Proculus.]
**I**f, indeed, it were possible (says Proculus) in the same terms described by us, to divide sesquitertia proportions into sesquioctava, and lemmata, we would have no further business: But because this can in no way be done, this must be investigated by us again by another rule. Therefore, since it has been proposed from the beginning to constrain and fill the duple proportion with the aforesaid means and sesquioctavas, it is necessary that the subduple term, together with two sesquioctavas, also has a sesquitertia. Let therefore the third number be taken from unity, according to the octuple proportion, it makes 64. From this, it is indeed possible to form three sesquioctavas: For every multiple number is considered to contain as many sub-multiple proportions denominated by itself as it is distant from unity, but it does not yield a sesquitertia. Therefore, tripling it again, we will have 192. Its sesquitertia is 256: and its sesquioctava is 216: And furthermore, its sesquioctava is 243. The ratio of the lemma itself, namely 256 to 243, remains after the

--- Page 313 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

512 is the double: which produces the harmonic mean, and 576, which produces the arithmetic mean. And if for the triple interval, namely 384 and 1152, we wish to take the aforesaid means, 576 retains the harmonic mean: which in the double [interval] preserved the arithmetic [mean]. And 768, which in the double [interval] was the greater extreme, obtains the place of the arithmetic mean. Again, if we wish to take the same means for the double and quadruple [terms], the intermediates of 768 and 1536 will be 1124 the harmonic mean: and 1152 the arithmetic. But if we wish to fill and complete the triple a second time, whose terms are 1152 and 3456, 1728 will provide us the harmonic mean: and 2304 the arithmetic. And if we also wish to fill the terms of the double, which is in the terms 1536 and 3072, 2048 will preserve the harmonic mean: and 2304 the arithmetic. But if we wish to constrain the third triple, namely the sixth and seventh portion, with similar means: the extremes for us will be 3456 and 10368. The means, however, indeed the harmonic 5184. And the arithmetic 6912. Whose figure is appended here. The intervals of this arrangement are still filled with tones, and lemmata, that is, minor semitones, and by some imitating Timaeus Locrus [Marginal note: Timæ.], they are also filled with apotomes, that is, major semitones. And although some Pythagoreans did not admit the semitone: because the ratio cannot be divided into two equal portions over a particular [interval], later harmonists, especially Ptolemy, [Marginal note: Ptolem.] and if they agreed that an exact semitone was not given, nevertheless divided the tone into unequal semitones, which are called major and minor, or lemma and apotome: Of these, Proclus, even from Plato's mind [Marginal note: Proculus], judges that lemmata must necessarily be placed, omitting apotomes: which do not pertain to the diatonic genus: which Plato uses. [Marginal note: Plato.] Therefore, these, with all other consonances, are thus placed in a straight line, as the following figure demonstrates to us.

[Diagram description: A large lambda-shaped diagram with decorative flourishes at the top and bottom. It contains columns of numbers. On the left side: 512, 576, 768, 1024, 1152, 1536, 2048, 2304, 3072, 3456. In the center: 8, 9, 12, 16, 18, 24, 32, 36, 48. On the right side: 576, 1296, 1152, 1728, 2304, 3456, 5184, 6912, 10368. There are also smaller numbers interspersed throughout the diagram: 2, 3, 18, 27, 36, 9, 54, 18, 108, 27.]

--- Page 314 ---
TONVS QVARTVS.                                  63

I           4/3         3  8  4   Tone        }
                        4  3  2   Tone        }   Diatessaron
                        4  8  6   Note, or    }
2 PLA                   5  1  2   To. [lemma.]}
            3/2         5  7  6   Tone        }
                        6  4  8   Tone        }   Diapente
                        7  2  9   lemma       }
3 PLA  II               7  6  8   Tone        }
                        8  6  4   Tone        }
            3/2         9  7  2   lemma       }   Diapente
                      1  0  2  4   Tone        }
4 PLA  III            1  1  5  2   Tone        }
            4/3       1  2  9  6   Tone        }   Diatessaron
       IIII           1  4  5  8   lemma       }
                      1  5  3  6   Tone        }
            4/3       1  7  2  8   Tone diesis }
                      1  9  4  4   lemma       }   Diatessaron
                      2  0  4  8   Tone        }
8 PLA       3/2       2  3  0  4   Tone        }
                      2  5  9  2   Tone        }   Diapente
       VIII           

--- Page 315 ---
**CANTICI PRIMI**

In which series thirty-four terms are found. Their consonance is four
[Marginal note: Seve.] octaves, with a fifth, and a tone: although Severus concludes the figure itself in a lemma;
but it is more clearly and lucidly gathered to terminate in a tone: For the proportion from one
to two is double, behold the first octave: Again, of this (two) is four,
and of this (four) again is eight: and of this (eight) also sixteen is double: Whence up
to this point four octaves extend: but of 16, 24 is sesquialter, where there is a
fifth: And to this (24), 27 has a sesquioctave ratio: and there the pro-
gression terminates. Whence it clearly appears that the figure terminates in a tone.

Why in this kind of description Plato used the diatonic genus more than the chromatic and enharmonic. Chapter V.

[Decorative initial T] Hree genera of harmony were in use among the ancients, as many
authors report, namely diatonic, enharmonic, and chromatic.
The diatonic, however, consists of a semitone, or lemma, and a tone, and another
tone: The enharmonic of a diesis, and another diesis, and a ditone: The chro-
matic, however, of a semitone, and another semitone, and three semitones. A diesis, however, is
like a fourth part, but not exactly: just as a lemma is not an entire semi-
[Marginal note: Proclus. Plato. Aristox.] tone: granted that some ancients (according to Proclus) called a diesis a semitone.
Therefore, Plato describes the business of the world and the soul through the diatonic: although Aris-
toxenus, not without the admiration of the wise, says that the ancients did not
know the diatonic figure: Which he did not assert as true: but, as is his custom, always seemed to
[Marginal note: Adrastus. Plato.] bring something new (as Adrastus says) into the midst. Therefore, Plato uses the diatonic
genus in the reason of the world and the soul, believing it to have taken up the reins
of rational life, leaving the enharmonic to preside over all life that is shared with
bodies: and the chromatic to the corporeal idea itself. This genus, however, is distinct,
and least noble. The enharmonic, however, is suited for teaching and instructing:
But the diatonic is fuller, simpler, and more noble than the others.
Therefore, with this genus, as being more suitable, he describes especially the soul's
primary office, and that of the universe.

By what wonderful artifice in the first of all creatures, which the Hebrews call מטטרון
Metatron, are contained those three nines: which complete twenty-seven,
namely their cube. Chapter VI.

[Decorative initial I] Nter the most recondite secrets of the Hebrews, this is held as most celebrated:
that one is the first of all creatures, containing the perfection of all of them,
which they call מטטרון שר הפנים, that is, Metatron, prince
of faces: because he always stands before the face of the Emperor, and has the right
of introducing the deserving to His presence. And the Hebrews themselves say that he
spoke with Moses, and brought him there: so that he might speak with the Creator face to
face: The letters of whose words, when calculated, yield (as is clear to those who know) 999.
Namely, nine hundreds, nine tens, and nine units: so that he connects the
virtue of all creatures: Of which the simpler are explained by units, the middle by tens-

--- Page 316 ---
TOMVS QVINTVS. 89

...rios, and the extremes, and coarser things by hundreds: which are nevertheless all three nines. All these things, since they terminate in the true tenth, which is the complement of all, complete the millennium: which is aleph, of which it is said at the end of the Song of Songs, [Marginal note: Song of Songs] הָאֶלֶף לְךָ שְׁלֹמֹה, that is, "the thousand is yours, Solomon": Yours, that is, who are peace to yourself: so that it may be intimated that although that (creature) is the most perfect of creatures, it is not, however, an end and peace to itself, since it terminates in aleph, that is, the millennium, which is the true first, and true unity, and tenth, and thousandth, and ultimate end of all: as it is often repeated in Isaiah, saying: "I am the first, and the last." [Marginal note: Isaiah] Hence, deservedly, He demands firstfruits and tithes from us. Nor should the queens of heaven, deservedly affected, be saddened if we call Mitatron the first creature of all simple things: since that is a name of office, and not of a person: whence it can and does apply to Mary: as is clear to one calculating the number that the letters of her name yield: and the extreme letters of those three words by which Mitatron sar apanim is said: for both yield 290. For in מִרְיָם, which is the Hebrew name of the most blessed virgin: whose ר gives 200, two. ם, 80, and י, 10. Which joined together constitute 290. The same amount is yielded by those extreme letters: of which the first, namely נ, gives 50. The last, which is ם, 40: and the middle, which is ר, 200: Which joined together yield 290. Nor should anyone therefore think that Mary, the mother of Christ, spoke to Moses: since this (as we have said) is a name not of a person, but of an office: let whoever it may be perform that office. But who then performed that office, the Hebrews say many things: but however the matter stood, it was he who spoke immediately, either an angel, or a man made angelic, or transformed into an angel, as Paul says with the Galatians: [Marginal note: Paul] "the law was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator." But God, or the Lord, or the Tetragrammaton is introduced speaking to Moses himself: because whatever the angel did, it was by the command, power, and influence of God Himself sending, as if He Himself were working: Who truly worked by the influence or power which (as we said above) Moses had demanded, not content with bare and sole angelic power.

That the same number, and in the same order, is contained in higher things by a certain super-excellent power. Chapter VII.

[P] Ostquam Moses described the fabric of the whole world, he added: "The heavens and all their host were completed," for which we have, "And all their ornament." And because the whole army and host of heaven and earth were produced by the Lord, therefore He Himself is called the prince of hosts: but in Hebrew שַׂר צְבָאוֹת (Sar Tzva'ot). The numbers of whose letters, when calculated, yield 999: ת, 400. שׂ, 300, and ר, 200. צ, 90, ו, 6, ב, 2, א, 1. Therefore, He is called the prince of the entire army: which is contained in those three nines: all of which are contained by the power of aleph, and of the millennium itself. Moreover, those three nines are also contained in the full letters of the great name of God, together with the letters that signify fire, water, air, or spirit, or wind, and dust: From which four elements, through the mediating power of the great name (as the Hebrews say), all things were produced.

--- Page 317 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

These are the full letters of the great name itself, and the letters signifying the elements.
יוד הא וו הא אלף למד הי יוד מם The calculation of these letters (as is manifest to experts) yields precisely the same number, which is 999. From which it is inferred that all things which were made from the elements by the power of the great name are bounded by that number with its proportions. These are greatly considered by those who follow that part of more secret theology which they call Gematria, that is, gemataria. And this method of proceeding in physical and divine matters was imitated by Pythagoras and his followers: although many, ignorant of these mysteries, working with pure numbers, lost both time and effort. Therefore, those three nines, filled with their Muses and harmonies, resounding on all sides, praise their maker together, hastening towards Him with the sweetest course.
<br/>
<br/>
<span style="float:right; margin-left:1em;">Pythag.</span>
That from the unity of the first, harmony results in all things. Chapter VIII.

[Decorative initial D] All created things, diffused and divided into many discordant and dissonant portions, would remain so, unless through due harmony into one

--- Page 318 ---
**FIFTH TONE. 90**

**In what way the described heptachord agrees with the soul. Chap. IX.**

**A**ND because Plato, through this heptachord of his, seems to describe the workmanship of both the human soul and the cosmic soul, it must also be investigated how it is adapted to the human soul itself, where this is first presupposed: that the soul itself, removed from all corporeal laws, is not a number in the quantitative sense: whence it is neither divided nor multiplied by parts. But it is a substantial number, uniform, self-reverting, and rational, surpassing all corporeal and material things by a long interval: Whose division is not according to matter: nor from inferior and coarser things: but proceeding from an efficient cause (says Proclus). From these, I say, perfect measures of all things, to which the creator looking back operates, he divides the soul, just as he divided this whole universe according to intelligible exemplars. Therefore, in the soul, there is this mode of division, immaterial, intellectual, unmixed, perfecting the living substance, generative of the multitude which is in it and under it, and collecting it into one order through harmony: which gathers diverse parts: and existing as the cause of unmixed purity, and bestowing upon the soul itself a confluent communion of principles of multitude, so that the soul itself (as Timaeus and Plato teach) is both divisible and indivisible. For if (as Aristotle rightly holds) there is in divisible things something indivisible that contains them: much more is it

--- Page 319 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Proculus.	and is reunited, proceeding by the Dionysian and Apollonian way: as Proculus touches upon from the ancient theology of Orpheus, Hesiod, Euripides, and Aeschylus: who in fables enveloped what they had learned from divine men.
Orpheus.
Hesiod.
Euripides.	For there is (as they teach) in the archetype a divine sun: from whom all harmonious beauty, and all grace, and fitting harmony, and life emanates:
Aeschylus.	In whose right hand is piety and beneficence: and in the left, severe punishment. But these pagan seers, either not perceiving the sacraments of God, or striving to conceal them, sang of all things that flourish in the supreme sun, concerning this sun which we see with bodily eyes. And they called this one Phoebus, Apollo, Sol (the Sun), as we touched upon above: Whom they said bore the Graces in his right hand: but a bow and arrows in his left. They also called him Bacchus, and Liber Pater. But omitting these things, as far as the present matter is concerned, they called him in the night Dionys

--- Page 320 ---
**FIFTH TONE. 91**
**How those three nines are found in man. Chapter X.**

[Large decorative initial H containing a figure] Man, existing as the most perfect image of the world, contains all those things which are gathered in the great world, in the same proportion: And first, a nine of hundreds in the inferior part, which is the twofold body: as Plato asserts: [Marginal note: Plato] Each of which (parts) is from four elements: For the corruptible (part) is from four alterable (elements), and the incorruptible (part), at least after resurrection, will be from nobler elements, by no means subject to corruption: these two fours give me eight: To which (so that the body may be joined together and live) a certain unique life is inherent: Let that be the soul, which the Hebrews call נפש, that is, nephes; or let it be the vital spirit, or the rational soul supplying the place of all lives: as the more recent (thinkers) say. From it with those eight, the first nine results: which terminates in the tenth, namely the superior proportion.

But in the soul is the second nine, collected from the five exterior senses, and the four interior (senses), namely the imaginative, cogitative, phantasy, and common sense: and it terminates at the intellect, as if at the tenth:

And in this is another, purer nine in simple numbers: which corresponds with the nine orders of angels, and superior enumerations: so that in it there may be a full image of angels and of God: as we shall discuss in its proper place: and it terminates in that tenth, namely the supreme fount, and parent of all: To whom all operations and prayers are due: as taught by the Son of God who said: When you pray, say Our Father. [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] And to whom finally, having turned, we ought to be united. However, the intervals of these enneads (groups of nine) are completed by operations (which they call secondary acts). For man has a threefold operation: and this (is) consonant and harmonious: with this inferior world in nature: with the heavens in the senses: with angels in the superior part, namely the rational, intellectual, and voluntary: Unless he had this consonance with all things, he would not be able to operate in all things, nor understand all things. And among all living beings, man alone rejoices in this honor: that he may act with all things: and may be able (to act) in all things, even in the supreme artificer, by understanding and loving.

But if we wish to precisely trace man to the figure of Plato and the Pythagoreans, which is contained by seven principal terms collected from the first even and from the first odd (number), as from the active and passive, [Marginal note: Plato Pytha.] we will recall that most common (saying) among the Peripatetics: [Marginal note: Peripate.] that there is in man, namely, the possible intellect receiving all things, and the agent intellect producing all concepts: which are received in that passive intellect. And in both, this one indeed receiving, and that one truly producing, there is a septenary (group of seven) collected from a ternary (group of three) and a quaternary (group of four): because it is the concept of supernal things, to which the ternary (is assigned); and of composite things, to which the quaternary is assigned. Moreover, man himself is composed of both parts, namely from the spiritual, that is, the mind, and from the coarser, that is, the body: from which a certain mixture of both results, especially the interior senses: which are partly animal, partly intellectual, connecting both.
M iij

--- Page 321 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

**Plato.** And if (beyond what Plato permits) it is allowed to descend to particulars, we will apply all those limits to man himself. For in him is unity: namely, a certain portion of divinity, by which he understands God and operates concerning Him. And this is doubled in a twofold intellect, active and passive; it is quadrupled in the fourfold elementary force; it is octupled in the combined (as they say) fourfold elements. On the other hand, it comes into a trinity through the threefold power of the soul; into a ninefold through the nine senses, five corporeal and external, and four internal; but it proceeds into a twenty-seventh by embracing those three enneads contained in man, in whom the intellect itself, or that supreme portion, is the leader and principal life. And all the intervals of these limits are filled by the proportionate operations of all those powers and parts; but let us return to the mundane heptachord.

What those three proportions, Musical, Geometrical, and Arithmetical, by which the soul and the whole world are ordered, mean. **Chapter XI.**

**Aristo.** [Illuminated initial C]elebrating, Aristotle draws the number three from Pythagorean principles, because we have it from nature and uphold it as a law. For from nature is the progression of multitude from one, and the return to the same, which happens through the ternary itself. For the Creator, content in Himself and enclosed, is the supreme unity; but into the many things produced by Him, which are called "other," the binary is diffused; but by recalling all these same things to Himself, He completes the ternary. And that unity is most perfect and most propitious; but the binary is unpropitious; but the ternary, converting the multitude, is itself a happy number, in which God rejoices, the work being brought, namely, to its proper end with a perfect image of Himself. For in it is that most perfect generating unity, whence it receives the name of father. The second, who makes the binary in divine things, is the begotten son, yet not unpropitious, because he is contained not outside that all-encompassing perfection of the divine essence, but within its embrace. Whence he is neither entirely other, nor second, except in person; for in essence he is entirely the same. The third is love connecting the parent with the offspring, and vice versa.
**Pythag.** Hence (as the Pythagoreans say), wherever one is found, that is fruitful and generating; but that which is generated is the binary, or second; but that which connects both makes the ternary. For neither does the binary, and the other, rest until through the ternary, that is, form, it returns to the first. Therefore, the identity of all things existing in the Creator is declared by musical propor**Procul.** tion (says Proclus). But the otherness of produced things by Arithmetical proportion; but the union of othernesses by Geometrical proportion. In the same series, the business of the soul (as the **Idem.** same Proclus says) proceeds, existing the same in itself, manifold in powers and senses, collected again to itself; the same again in the Creator, but manifold in itself, always tending towards union with the same Creator. For the Creator assigned three containing unions to the soul itself and to the world, which **Plato** Plato called "mediations," because he seems to bind the order of the universe. The Geometrical indeed comprehends substances

--- Page 322 ---
TONVS QVINTVS. 91

...multitude, and unites substantial processes: For the reason of union is harmonic similarity, which contains all identities and their essences in one union. But Arithmetic, which folds alterities—namely, primary, middle, and ultimate—into one, and joins them. By these very proportions, Plato (Plato) teaches that cities are governed in the Republic. For the harmonic proportion is a likeness of justice, assigning indeed a greater ratio to greater terms, but a lesser one to lesser terms. Arithmetic, giving to each what is equal according to measure, leads to peace among peoples. But Geometric (proportion), by equalizing and binding, provides union. And the ancient Greek poets (as Hesiod (Hesiod.) and others, as Proclus (Procul.) himself mentions) feigned these proportions to have been the daughters of Themis: who contains the powers and strengths of all things, and is the divine power of those things which are right (or lawful). For 'fas' in Greek is Θέμις, and her daughters are Eunomia, Dice, Irene. The image of Eunomia is the Geometric proportion, which is, as it were, leading to good union. Arithmetic is of Irene, which (as we said) leads to peace. For peace in Greek is εἰρήνη, that is, it is called Irene. Hence Martianus (Martia.), the jurist, called those who were in charge of public discipline and correcting morals, Irenarchs. But Dice is represented in music, by which is declared identity and justice, attaining equality according to dignity. And each binds and connects: Music in the identity of the principle, Arithmetic in equal distribution, Geometric in union with the principle from which they proceeded. Hence Timaeus named these proportions "bonds." Therefore, these proportions penetrate the entire substance of the world and the soul, and they make that very one out of many, having obtained the connective and unitive forces of various species. Since there are three of these: Geometric indeed connects everything that pertains to substance in souls themselves and in things. For substance is one ratio (or principle) which permeates through all things, containing and embracing all things: primary, middle, and ultimate; just as the

--- Page 323 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

**Why the Pythagoreans and Academics embrace the business of the world and the soul with seven limits. Chapter XII.**

[Marginal note: Timaeus. The Same]
**I**t seemed good to Timaeus, and to Plato emulating him, to embrace the soul with seven limits: In the first, placing unity first, as the supreme [aspect] of the soul itself: by which, containing the highest unity in the Creator, it may be the same with Him: because all things pre-existing in the Word were the same with the Word itself: as our Theologians say [Marginal note: Orpheus]. But imitating Orpheus, we say that the soul places its head in the first intellect. The second limit, which contains a double proportion to the first, indicates the soul's progress from God. The third, indeed, its egress to the same. The fourth, moreover, its egress from itself, so that it may be occupied with performing other things. The fifth, a retrocession to itself, so that the process from itself is connected to the progress it makes from Him who precedes it: and its return to itself depends on its own return to the Creator preceding it. The last limits, indeed, which are constituted from solids, teach the conversion of bodies, to which the soul itself is connected. I said "of bodies," because the world consists of a twofold body, incorruptible and celestial: and corruptible and earthy: And in a similar way, so that it may contain a perfect image of the world, man is perfected from a twofold body, according to the Platonists [Marginal note: Plato], elementary and celestial: The elementary, moreover, is denoted by the cube, or solid of the binary, which signifies matter; the celestial, indeed, by the cube of the ternary.

Therefore, the harmony of the world, that which is in the mind, and soul, and in the whole human being, follows: as is held in many places by the Academics [Marginal note: Academics. Proclus], especially Proclus: but here he says the world partakes of harmony in ten ways: the soul, however, in four ways. And just as unity itself is the cause of the quaternary: here, however, of the denary: so intellectual harmony produces the animal [soul]: this, however, the sensible [soul]. Hence the Hebrews say, from their most recondite secrets, that the soul proceeds from the great name of God of four letters, and the whole world proceeds from ten enumerations, and is governed: But by the three supreme ones by command, and by the seven remaining ones by execution: hence they call these seven, the enumerations of the fabric [Marginal note: Syrianus].

According to unity, therefore (as it pleases Syrianus), the perfect and whole world is represented. According to the binary, however, multitude and variety are indicated in it: And through the division of even and odd, masculine and feminine, beginning from the Gods themselves down to roots and plants: For according to the binary and ternary, that which is in the Gods: and according to the quaternary and novenary, that which is in the genera superior to us and better: and according to the cubes, proceeding down to terrestrial and ultimate species of life, and reducing them to the first [Marginal note: Pythagoreans].

Therefore, perfect harmony is completed by cubes: which the Pythagoreans were accustomed to call harmony: because they alone among figures have angles proportionally equal to their sides and surfaces. But this happens in a twofold way, namely, by dividing and collecting: Therefore (says Proclus, following, as he says, the ancient theologians [Marginal note: Proclus. Ancient Theologians]), there are in the Creator twofold powers, divisive and cohesive: by the former, indeed, he (Proclus) asserts that He separates His dominion from the Father: but by the latter, to attach all of His fabric to the paternal unity [Marginal note: The Same]: Therefore, the Theologians themselves call these works incisions, and

--- Page 324 ---
TONE FIVE. 93

bonds. But the generative and incisive powers are double; the perfective powers, however, are triple. Nor should anyone wonder if Proclus [Marginal note: Procul.] seems to distinguish the Craftsman from the Father, according to the mind of the Theologians: who are undoubtedly Hebrews; and whoever has even sniffed out the paths of both will easily judge that the entire Platonic doctrine is sprinkled with the teaching of those who learned from them: For Moses also (as must be carefully observed) introduces Elohim as the craftsman of things: which we have interpreted as God. And to one who carefully attends to the series of Hebrew Theology, this is the name of the Holy Spirit: who is also introduced as hovering over the waters, cherishing them. David, also aware of these mysteries, sang: "By the word of the Lord the heavens were made firm; and by the spirit of his mouth all their power." [Marginal note: Psalm.] For the work was made firm by the word, but arranged by the spirit of his mouth: whom Moses called the Spirit of Elohim. Nor should our Theologians be saddened, thinking that this is contrary to Augustine's opinion, celebrated by all: by which it is decreed that the external works of the Trinity are so undivided that whatever one person does, the others also do: Which is true, but the work is ascribed to one as commanding: to another as sustaining: and to another as arranging: as Paul, [Marginal note: Paulus] the chief teacher of all these mysteries, expresses, saying: "From whom are all things, in whom are all things, through whom are all things." For from the Father, as from the first source, all things emanate: But in the Son, as in a reservoir, they are placed through ideas: But through the Spirit they are unfolded: and each thing is distributed in its proper degrees.

How in the soul of the world (speaking in the Platonic manner) the intervals of their limits are filled. Chapter XIII.

WHEN they come to the complements of the intervals, those who interpret Plato give examples from the soul of the world, by which all things are vivified: as the Academics say. [Marginal note: Academ:] But we attribute this to the spirit of life: and to Him who is called the tree of life, the fountain of life, and the life of the world. Therefore, these people suggest either that Plato spoke only of that universal soul: or that through that universal soul, he consequently described the complements and connections of the lesser world, which holds the image of the greater and the archetype. For they say that harmonic mediation gathers all the identity of the soul: and grants an inseparable communion to celestial things, distributing greater motions to larger circles, and smaller motions to smaller ones: For those things that contain move more swiftly than those that are contained. Thus also to the more subtle and tenuous elements, it distributes greater and swifter motions, but to the coarser ones, smaller and slower motions, and consequently lower degrees in which those various consonances result. And just as two means, namely the harmonic and the arithmetic, divided the universe into two: so the sesquitertian and sesquialter ratios constituted the particular adornment of the world: And they bring as an example the divine kinds of souls, daemons, and particular rational souls, by which the spheres are filled. And they say (especially Proclus) [Marginal note: Procul.] that divine kinds participate wholly in the whole kinds of those prior. But daemons (not those whom we call devils: but certain celestial and wise intelligences) thus wholly par-
M v.

--- Page 325 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

...participate, they say, not however in those whole superior things, but in something of them: because they cannot receive the properties of divine kinds, that is, of supernal intelligences, or numbers: which are in the archetype. But particular kinds, namely our rational souls, participate in superior things, not however always: but divisibly, and for a time. Therefore, not constantly, but with many intervals, man speculates in many ways, hindered by the coarser matter to which he is bound. But that universal soul has the principles of all good: because diffused into all things, it fills all things and vivifies them. The same can be said about our supreme soul:
[Marginal note: Aristote. Plotin. Ioannes Augusti. Moses. Acadē. Trism.]
which Aristotle calls the active intellect, Plotinus the intellect absolutely, John light, Augustine the superior portion: but Moses *neshamat chayim*, for which we have "spiraculum vitae": In the text, however, it is "of lives": because that supreme [thing] (by whatever name it is called) lives with a superior life, and communicates the same to inferior things. If our rational soul is united with this (which the Academics call particular), then according to Trismegistus, it acquires mind: and feels the power of that superior soul: as when

--- Page 326 ---
**FIFTH TONE. 94**

**That those things which have been said about beings in the spheres seem to agree with sacred scripture. Chapter 14.**

[Decorative initial N] or should anyone wonder if the Pythagoreans and Academics [Marginal note: Pythag: Academ.]
say that the spheres are filled with intelligences and souls in those same places, since it has also been said by Moses in sacred scripture: "The heavens are completed, and all their host;" for which we have, "their adornment." For the celestial host and militias are intelligences and intellectual forms, which are the most beautiful adornment of the heavens themselves. For through these forms, which Plato, with Moses, calls the host of the heavens, the celestial spheres (says Proclus) are adorned. [Marginal note: Plato Moses.] [Marginal note: Procul. Euripid.]
Therefore Euripides, and many after him, said these are the dwellings and courts of the Gods, that is, of celestial minds. But what and how many forms and intellects are in the heavens, distinguished by God Most High himself, only He knows, who numbers the multitude of the stars (as the Psalmograph sings) and calls them all by name. [Marginal note: Psalm.]
For He calls the names not of corporeal stars, but of the presiding intelligences: as some wise men explain. For to each orb, the entire school of the wise, even the Peripatetics, assigns at least one intelligence. But since each star has its own power and influence on lower things, it is necessary that it also has its own presiding intelligence, which confers power so that it may act, since operation can by no means proceed from a pure body.

Regarding our souls, however, a difficulty remains, and it would be considered ridiculous by many that souls themselves are placed in the spheres. Yet it does not seem strange to those who truly understand. For even some Catholics of no mediocre genius have proclaimed that human souls are carried up to various spheres: which is not to be understood only of corporeal spheres, but of those supramundane wheels, to which souls return just as they proceeded from them, as is most fully handed down in the more secret Theology of the Hebrews. And these are, no doubt, the various and many mansions in the Father's house, as the supreme truth proclaims. [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.]
But the Pythagoreans assert that they (souls) make a passage while they descend through those intelligences and spheres, to which they return after the perfected course of a well-lived life. [Marginal note: Pythag. Astron.]
And from this, astronomers (if they have any truth) determine by prognostication that this one is Saturnian, or Martian, another Jovian, Venereal, or Mercurial, or Phoebean (solar), or Lunar. For indeed, there are various affections, inclinations, and customs in humans: not indeed proceeding only from matter variously disposed (as some think), but from various influx and diverse form: not indeed by specific diversity, but by particular and proper (diversity): Whose degrees, even if they are variously distributed by Him, who remaining the same divides (says the Apostle) to each as He wills, [Marginal note: Paulus]
nevertheless, secondary angelic and celestial causes cooperate, disposing the body and other things which God has committed to them. Nor should anyone say that the Apostle was speaking there about the division of graces: because (as Gregory rightly thinks) minds, both angelic and human, are assimilated in receiving gifts, just as they agree in the participation of natural degrees.

--- Page 327 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

**What can be said about the complements of the intervals of the three enneads. Chapter 15.**

[Decorative initial P] After we have dealt with the filling of intervals, whatever can be said about the complements of the first kinds, twenty-seven, or of the three enneads, must be discussed. They are indeed filled according to superparticular proportions, as the Pythagoreans say. And this is [Marginal note: Pythag.] according to only one portion imparted to things. Yet that unique life is not divided; but just as the sun is unique in itself, yet manifold and varied in its rays and effects, and influencing more effectively in one time and place than another, so too the soul, existing as one in the body, has very diverse effects. And to begin with the nobler parts: In the intellect, or in the head, it understands; in the heart, it wills; in the eyes, it sees; in the ears, it hears; in the hands, it works; in the feet, it walks; in the intestines, it digests, and intervenes even to expel feces. Where, although it operates as a whole, since it is not divisible, it nevertheless acts not according to its whole self, but according to a part of its power. For if the power were always the same, the work would consequently also be the same. Nor does the variety of organs suffice to bring about such varied effects, because, separated from the body, it could only bring about a single work. Nevertheless, removed from the body, it wills, understands, moves according to place, and uses the senses, which are according to the inner man. It is therefore varied in its effects, and unique in itself, which engages itself with its organs and instruments according to a part (of its power); whence results a superparticular proportion, namely, of the whole to some proportioned part. So too the life of the world is unique, of which it is said: God, to whom all things live. And [Marginal note: Paulus Aratus Orph.] Paul, celebrating the saying of Aratus, says: In Him (namely, God) we live, and move, and have our being. From the hidden recesses of whose unity (says Orpheus) a numerous multitude proceeds. Whence the tree of life situated in the midst of paradise, which bestows life on all, is unique; and yet it is called עץ חיים (etz chayim), that is, "tree of lives" (or "tree of living things"); because that unique tree diffuses diverse rays of life into other things. Just as Paul says [Marginal note: Paulus] concerning the life of the mystical body: "The one and the same Spirit divides to each one as He wills." This Spirit of life, [Marginal note: Ezechi.] existing as one with the tree of lives, also vivifies all things, as we are taught by the oracle of Ezekiel, where he says: "The spirit of life was in the wheels." In the wheels, I say, mundane, or celestial, and terrestrial. For all things, rejoicing in their spherical form, imitate that supreme and divine sphere. This life, therefore, existing whole in itself, communicates itself according to a certain portion (which is by no means cut off from it), to one indeed in a sesquialtera proportion, to another in a sesquitertia proportion, to another in a sesquioctava, to another in a sesquisextadecima; whence result the diapente, diatessaron, tonus, and lemma. But with what particular kinds and species, by this or that proportion, that first life, diffusing itself, disposes all things by its numbers, weights, and measures, no one has yet even hinted in particular. Nor do I think it can be expressed or perceived, except by those purified and filled with wisdom, by which they are able to know all things and embrace all things. [Marginal note: Sapien.] Just as it is said in the Book of Wisdom: "He Himself gave me true knowledge of the things that are, that I might know the disposition of the world..."

--- Page 328 ---
**FIFTH TONE. 95**

secrets, and the virtues of the elements: the beginning, and the end, and the middle of times: the changes of successions: the completions of times: the changes of customs: the dispositions of the stars: the natures of animals: the rages of beasts: the force of the winds and the thoughts of men: the differences of shrubs: the virtues of roots: and whatsoever are hidden, and unforeseen, I have learned. And this happens by that mind having been attained, and by the outpouring of that grace, concerning which John says: You have an anointing from the Holy One: and you know all things. And again: You have no need that anyone teach you: because His anointing teaches you concerning all things: [John] Indeed, the anointing of Him, concerning whom the highest Truth says: He will suggest all things to you: and will teach you all things. And this happens through the death of the kiss, as the more secret theologians teach: [CHRIST] concerning which it is said in the Psalm: Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints. [Psalm] Or as Paul says: through transformation into the same [Paul] image: or according to the Platonists, by a certain essential contact of the ideas of that first intellect [Platonists] powerful to do all things in the recipient. From which contact, as if from a union, certain images are conceived: and the species of things are impressed: or the soul awakens: and is purified by ambrosia and nectar from the contagion induced by the Lethaean whirlpool: as Pythagoras, Empedocles, Heraclitus, and Socrates in Phaedrus set forth: and after them a very great crowd proclaimed. [Pythag., Empedo., Heracl., Peripatetics] But the family of the Peripatetics asserts that the rational soul from the beginning was like a blank slate, and that it always receives new forms. But neither of them proves their opinion: whence what the truth of the matter is, God knows, and those who are illuminated by divine light. And speaking of the purification which is sought for receiving that wisdom, Plotinus says: [Plotinus] that it proceeds thus far: that the pure mind, stripped of rust and foreign affections, may be able to adhere to its kinsman and first parent, and contemplate Him. Which the highest truth admonishes with an clear voice, saying: Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God. [CHRIST] In whom also, as in an archive and fount of ideas, they may be able to perceive all grades of things distinctly and clearly by that knowledge which Augustine calls "matutinal": [Augustine] and afterwards descend to that knowledge of things in themselves: which by the same is named "vespertinal": By which not only the souls of the blessed, but also those not fully separated from bodies, attain in ecstasy, and a certain excess of mind, beyond what human condition, darkened by this gloom, can endure: Or they are taught by divine oracles: just as we can conjecture concerning Abraham, the great patriarch, from the book on formation, [Abraham] compiled by him (as is asserted): where from things signified by the letters of the names of things in the Hebrew idiom, and through their revolutions and permutations, and through the numbers assigned by them: and the vowel points and accents, he indicates the quiddities of things, and their agreement by a certain wondrous artifice, rather by contemplating than by expressing. Therefore, let us here pursue our subject.

How all things are constituted by their number, weight, and measure. Chapter XVI.

**P**ostquam therefore we cannot describe the full harmony of things, we will pursue metaphorical discourses, and those borrowed from lower things: Which, although they often appear varied, nevertheless many times con-

--- Page 329 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...they agree in meaning: whereas those who differ in words are judged as disparate or foreign.
[Marginal note: Plato.] For what the wise man hints at through number, weight, and measure, Plato describes through numbers, figures, and solids: For by numbers he wished to signify the specific forms of things, which Aristotle also compared to numbers:
[Marginal note: Aristote.] But by measures he indicates the powers bestowed upon each thing: about which even the highest Truth speaks in the Gospel, saying:
[Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] To each He gave according to his own measure, that is, according to what was measured for each by those archetypal measures, which measure all things with the most just examination:
But by solids, the weights of things are understood, and the heavy elements, which always lead us downwards: or the inclinations of things, which,
[Marginal note: Augusti.] like weights, draw and impel us either to good or to evil. Hence Augustine calls love a weight, saying: My weight is my love; I am carried thither, whither I love.
Again, by numbers the arithmetic mean is designated. By dimensions and measures, the geometric mean. But by weights, the musical mean: which, in a balanced proportion or likeness, comprehends the speed and slowness of movements, and the sharpness and gravity of voices, and the heavier or lighter inclinations of things. And just as in strings, or pipes, or any sounding instruments, temperaments derived from weights are necessary. So in all things, especially in man, the bond of all things, so that he may be well-tempered, appetites must be moderated: and natural inclinations must be moderated towards the goal of reason, or of the divine law inherent in human minds. Foods also, and all things which we convert to our use, must be moderated by their own weights: just as in this greater machine, the elements, the heavens, and all things rejoice in their proper temperaments: so much so that innumerable species and forms, balanced by their measures, harmoniously agree: Whose subject bodies, although all are composed of four elements, are nevertheless found to be innumerable. Nor is it wonderful: For if from a cube, which is formed from three numbers, namely linear, plane, and solid: and is figured by four surfaces, diverse and almost infinite lines are drawn from the center to the circumference: how much more in the mundane cube, derived from the ternary (as we wrote above) into twenty-seven, will innumerable forms and innumerable composite subjects be found? although all things are composed of four elements, as if from four principal surfaces, through their better numbers, by which multiplied forms correspond to the subject bodies. Which are led through the seven stars, and through the seven intelligences presiding over them: and through the seven divine powers, from which the intelligences receive whence they flow. And how excellently that septenary, resulting from four surfaces and three numbers, is led into a composite through the celestial, angelic, and divine septenary, with the intervention also of the duodenary of signs: which is led through the parts of the septenary. For three times four, and four times three, constitute the duodenary. Whence such great consonance results: that musical artists, following nature as their guide, have striven to adapt their harmonic instruments to such harmonious causes. For the ancients, content with the number of elements, with Mercury as inventor, four ba-

--- Page 330 ---
**FIFTH TONE. 96**

...they had four strings: as Nicomachus [Nicoma.] is the author, of which they wished Hypate to represent earth, Parhypate
water, Nete fire, Paranete air. Which number was suffi-
cient for them up to the times of Orpheus. And because inventions offer an easy path for those wishing to add,
posterity easily progressed further: For Chorebus [Chore.], king of the Lydians, added the fifth string;
Hyagnis the Phrygian, the sixth; Terpander [Hyag. Terpan,] the Lesbian, finding the seventh,
equated it to the number of the seven planets. And of this septenary of stri-
ngs, they attributed the heavier and slower (string) to heavy Saturn, the slowest in motion.
Thus each of the remaining ones they equated in its own order to the planets. Later
ones, however, progressed still further: For Lycaon added the eighth; but Prophrastus [Lycaon. Prophr.]
Periotes, the ninth: so that they might represent the harmony of the nine spheres, or
of the first ennead which we described. But Estiacus [Estiacus T. m. xi.] of Colophon

--- Page 331 ---
                          OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

To the principles they applied three letters of their alphabet, אמש. And now those are arranged by certain intelligences (which they call Ophannim) through the seven wandering stars: which are sometimes found in their own, sometimes in a foreign house, they wished to denote by seven letters: which are of twofold pronunciation, namely, more softly and more strongly, according to the variety of points applied to them. Which letters of this kind are בגד כפרת, But the remaining twelve letters, of always uniform pronunciation, they ascribe to the twelve signs: which are: הוזחט ילסנצקע. And thus they distributed all the letters of their alphabet: which are twenty-two. But these, mixed and permuted, constitute inexplicable words: which they wish to signify innumerable bodies: which are formed from those, which we brought up above, flat and solid, and their mixtures. Moreover, they wish each compound to be named by those letters, which designate the causes converging to form that compound conduc

--- Page 332 ---
FIFTH TONE. 97

When a product is narrated under the name Elohim, only the maker is introduced. But when it finds the complements and describes the consummations of things, the tetragrammaton is introduced together with Elohim. When it also describes the making of man: who is the perfect bond of the whole world, and the most beautiful work of God, filled with divinity above all others, the four-lettered creator is introduced together with Elohim: when it is said: *And the Lord God* (יהוה אלהים *Adonai Elohim*) *formed man from the dust of the earth.* For this quaternary is, as it were, a fount, from which not only four elemental rivers (as we shall explain elsewhere) emanate, but also whatever is composed of them, in whatever note they may be found: just as from the numeral quaternary, as from a root and foundation, every number is proven to spring forth: as is evident through arithmetical deductions: Yet this quaternary does not constitute a quaternity in divine matters: since it never departs from the unity of divinity. And since it is the fount and origin of all harmony and of every beauty, therefore in the archetype it holds a principal seat, according to the Theology of the Hebrews, in Tipheret (תפארת): Which signifies beauty, glory, majesty, all-encompassing perfection, and most complete consonance, inexpressible by us. Well then, he from whom all life and beauty comes, is introduced into the mundane monochord, as vivifying and adorning.

*How all these three novenaries are still contained in the supreme name of God, and emanate from it. Chapter XVIII.*

[Large decorative initial S] But so that we may ascend to the first and supreme principle, beyond which no access is given, we will outline with what mystery, and with what sacrament, those three novenaries, or the cube of the supercelestial ternary, from which the entire cube of created things descends, are contained in the supreme name of God: and in the super-excellent measure of God: to which that name is attributed: and from there emanate all things which are contained in that linear square, or superficial, and cube: For from that supreme measure, and fount of all emanations (which the Hebrews call the Superior Crown, and we, taught by Christ, call the Father) [Marginal note: Hebrews] first emanates the Son: who is called Wisdom by the Hebrews and by us: And from both [Marginal note: CHRIST. Hebrews.] the spirit is produced: which completes the first and true ternary. Nor, because it reached the ternary, was that first unity exhausted and unfruitful: on the contrary, the whole Trinity was most fruitful: and squaring its ternary, it produced nine choirs of angels: and again squaring, it fabricated nine heavens. And through repeated squaring, it brought forth the novenary of lower things: From these novenaries results the cube 27: beyond which the ternary does not extend. Therefore, arriving at that cube, there is no further progress: since number by its very nature, when it has grown in length, breadth, and depth, cannot be extended further. But because every generating agent is fruitful before that generation, so that this fruitfulness in the Father and in the supreme fount might be implied to have pre-existed, it claimed for itself a name which contains both cubes of the ternary—

--- Page 333 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...contains: which is 27. I said both: because to the cube produced externally corresponds that [one] from which this [one] is produced: Which, existing in that supreme fount, as an idea, & principle of generations, never recedes from unity. Which name in the Hebrew language is this very [one] אהיה אשר אהיה ehieh aser ehieh, Which we have translated, I am who I am. The number of whose letters, if calculated in the first word with the second: & again in the second with the third: in both cases, according to the computation of the greater number in the middle word, yields 27: Indeed, each אהיה provides [a value], and אשר [provides] 6, For א gives one: ש 3, and ר 2, which joined together constitute 6. And this number (6) with 21, yields 27: Behold then how 27 is found in that name in two ways: so that both that divine number, which never departing from unity is the idea, & fount of numbers, may be denoted: & that of creatures, which is distinguished, & numbered in the kinds of things. And not without mystery is the twin 27 connected by that word aser: which among us imports a relative, which is 'who'. Through which relation, or in which, those two numbers are joined: & their conjunction is expressed: just as through relations are indicated all operations which God has internally, & externally. For the supreme teacher Christ Jesus, when he wished to explain those most holy persons produced, & producing, expressed [them] in no other way than through certain relations, calling [them] Father, Son, & Holy Spirit. Likewise, & in all things which he does with us, he takes on some relative name: by which his work also may be indicated. For when he fabricated the world, he took on the name of fabricator, or creator: & that in respect to the created creature. Similarly, while he rules, & orders the world itself, he is called ruler, & governor: & through rule, & governance he is joined with us: just as also through creation, when he created, or produced. Thus finally you will always find God acting, & being joined with us through certain relations: whether these are real, or rational, as is disputed by Theologians, let it not be a contention for the present. And while also in reality he diffuses himself in us not only by grace, but in a better way, from this diffusion results the relation of the filler to the filled. Certainly therefore if also that twofold number, 27, embraces the relative: which nevertheless in God is something most absolute, importing much more, & much greater things. Which, as a greatest secret, he indicated to Moses to be reported to his fathers, & brothers, when with a

--- Page 334 ---
TONVS QVINTVS. 93

...a manifold trinity in all things: since all these same things possess an image or trace of the triune God, at least in this: because all things have their egress and beginning from God, and their progress and end in Him from whom they proceeded. Which beginning and end of things is God Himself, as is indicated through the letters of His supreme name. For there is א (Aleph), which is the beginning of letters and signifies unity, which is the beginning of numbers. And י (Yod), which imports the denary (ten) and the complement of numbers. And thus these two letters denote that the Named One Himself is the beginning and end of all things. Also, two ה (He) intervene: of which the first mediates between unity and the denary, indicating the first offspring of created things, which is in the mind of God, emanating from the first principle signified by א (Aleph), and tending towards the ultimate end indicated by י (Yod). But the other ה (He), which is the last letter, both of that supreme name and of the Tetragrammaton, suggests the unfolding of things in their proper kind. Therefore the Hebrews say: [Marginal note: He

--- Page 335 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Having enumerated as many hundreds as there are numbers and tens, he gathers all into a millenary, which is signified by א, aleph. This letter, in the lines by which its character is formed, comprehends (as we have said) all the numbers of the letters of the tetragrammaton. Each of these letters, not without great mystery, signifies a circular number, so that all those numbers are circular, and all circular numbers are comprehended in these same letters. These are the quinary (five), senary (six), and denary (ten). And the quinary is denoted by the letter ה, he; the senary by ו, vau; and the denary by י, iod. These individual numbers, and all of them together, properly signify that true intelligible sphere, God, who also gave His own image in a circle to all things produced by Him, so that, the course of the world completed, they might strive to return to that from which they proceeded.

Another mystery, which is contained in these same letters, must also be observed. For ה, he, signifying the quinary, indicates the fifth essence (quintessence), inherent in all things composed of the four elements. And ו, vau, signifying the perfect senary number, denotes that life by which all things live. And י, iod, signifying the perfect denary number, represents divinity itself, by which all things are filled, as has often been said, and which all things represent either by image, or by trace and likeness. If, however, we return to the supreme name, in which א, aleph, is placed instead of ו, vau, and this at the very beginning of the word, so that it may be understood that the named (God) never departs from His circular property: and א, aleph itself, signifying unity, which is the principle of all circular numbers. For it (Aleph/unity) also returns into itself, and potentially contains all numbers, and brings them into actuality through multiplied unity. And finally, it leads to the unity of the denary (ten), centenary (hundred), and millenary (thousand), which is again signified by א, aleph. In this, most fittingly figuring God: who, existing as supremely one, potentially contains all numbered things, and unfolds all things into particular and numbered forms, and finally recalls all those same things into Himself: so that the whole mundane enharmony, proceeding from the One, most consonant by a single life and breath, may tend towards and return to the One.

--- Page 336 ---
TONE SIX. 99

By what harmony all things are contained in man, as in a small instrument. Tone Six.
On the mode of proceeding, and the general harmony of man with the greater world, and the archetype. Chapter One.
That man imitates the world in a circular figure. Chapter II.
On the proportion of measurements in man. Chapter III.
On the consonance of his members and features with each other. Chapter IIII.
That all things are included in man, a general discourse. Chapter V.
With what elegance the elements are found in this man. Chapter VI.
What corresponds to the elements in man himself. Chapter VII.
From composites, with which stones agree. Chapter VIII.
To which metals correspond. Chapter IX.
With which certain mixed minerals harmonize with wondrous art. Chapter X.
With which plants flourish and grow. Chapter XI.
That animal conditions live in man is clear to all. Chapter XII.
What the ancients thought about the transmigration of the human soul into beasts: and what the truth of the matter is. Chapter XIII.
What concerning

--- Page 337 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**
**CONCERNING THE MANNER OF PROCEEDING, AND**
**the general harmony of man with the greater world, and the ar-**
**chetype. Chapter One.**

[Large decorative initial P]
**Apollo** [marginal note] **P**ainters, most accurate emulators of nature, diligently imitate, as far as they can, those things which they depict. For painting (says Apollonius the Pythagorean) is a certain imitation of a natural thing, prepared by nature; but the composition of colors is from art. In the former, however, the more powerful force of painting is placed. And what they do with colors, likewise the describers of truth strive to do to the best of their ability, whether they be poets, or orators, or historiographers. In all of these, imitation and a full description of things, which nature bestows, is more commended than an artificial composition of characters. Therefore, since we are describers of the works of the supreme artist, it is right that the manner of writing for those things which we compose should correspond to our abilities. Of this, our Moses, full of God, stands as a most clear example, who, writing the creation of both worlds, wove it together with fitting care, as each of them required. For he narrates the parts of the macrocosm (as the order of nature demanded) as produced by a mere command. But coming to the lesser world (which nevertheless is greater in virtue and mystery), he describes its creation with a more celebrated artifice, inasmuch as it itself was fashioned with a more excellent gift. Which is manifest in those things which were done concerning him. For he had prepared a dwelling for him beforehand, into which he led him, now completed and ready. Afterwards he bestowed dominion over all living things. He planted a place of delight, adorned with all pleasures, for his enjoyment. He gave him a most pleasant companion. And he gave all things to his will, as to a legitimate heir, with only one tree excepted, so that from it he might recognize a superior Lord. For in this, as in his own form (say **Mercur** [marginal note] Mercury and Solomon), he delighted. But also, in creating him, with a most solemn assembly summoned—either of the Most Holy Trinity, as Catholics say; or of the holy angels, as some Hebrews assert; or of supramundane deities, or of the measures of things to be made (which we can call ideas, along with attributes and persons), as more secret Theologians affirm—with a certain prelude having been sent before, he fashioned him not by mere command, but with his own hands and power. Observing this, the wisest **Moses** [marginal note] Moses narrates the creation of man with a longer and more celebrated discourse. For he repeats his formation twice, now created, now made, now having breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, not without mystery, distinctly setting forth all things which were done by the artist concerning him. He also discusses other things pertaining to him with a most solemn narration. Rightly therefore do the creator and the writer pursue man with such diligence, since in him is placed the whole force of nature and the most sublime divine power, as that wise Saracen **A'gazel** [marginal note] Algazel says: Coming to the composition of man, nature ceased, as if nothing more honorable was to be composed at hand.

--- Page 338 ---
**TONVS SEXTVS. 100**

Having. For in him is contained (Galen testifying) all wisdom, beyond which nothing [Marginal note: Galen.]
is found, but (as we might more correctly say) it is not conceived by us. Moreover,
he knew that on earth only man possesses virtue and and would cultivate heavenly things,
therefore he fashioned him with such diligence. Whence, since we have deservedly
preferred Moses in the description of both worlds, following him immediately,
we too will describe the artistry of the human world with greater diligence:
In which, with a certain inestimable art and incomprehensible wisdom, the artisan
gathered all things which he had distributed in such a spacious machine:
so that, having become the bond of all things, and gathering all things into one, just as
all things themselves emanated from one, so, gathered together in man, they might be led
back to the same (one) through him. Which is necessary, if the work ought to imitate the
artisan: who is a certain sphere and a circle, says Hermes. [Marginal note: Hermes]
And in like manner, its creation is also a circle: one extreme of which is its exemplar,
or the idea residing in that unique mind, or word, the middle (is) all created things,
but the other extreme (is) man, who is both produced last by the artisan,
and most similar to the producer: so that in this, that saying of Origen may also have a place: [Marginal note: Origen.]
that the end in those acting rightly is always similar to the beginnings. Therefore,
the circle of created things stood open, until, with man united with the Word,
those two extremes might be closed: Which was most especially done by Him who said: "I am Alpha and
Omega." And just as that divine Trinity is enclosed in one essence, so these three worlds
are enclosed in a single circle: Concerning which, Plato most extensively in Phaedrus, [Marginal note: Plato. Proclus.]
And after him, Proclus in "On Vows and Prayers" briefly relates: For he says: "Created things
form a certain circle's orbit, beginning from God and ending in God himself: For all
things remain in Him, and are turned back to the same (Him): which conversion they have according to
the perfecting trinity." John commemorates these three worlds, saying: [Marginal note: John.]
"He was in the world, and the world was made through him, and the world did not know him."
He calls them all worlds, so that he may declare that the being of all is the same: For all things are,
and have being communicated from Him who said: "I AM has sent me to you." Yet
he distinguishes them, so that he may also demonstrate that there is a difference between them: Yet one is
the image of the other: For the world we inhabit contains an image of God:
and man has the image of the world and of the archetype: And hence there is harmony for man with
both. But let us begin with the correspondence which he has through the body with this
mundane structure, so that we may ascend in due order from visible things to invisible things.

**That man imitates the world in circular figure. Chapter II.**

[Large decorative initial E]
There exists a saying of the wise, that lower things always emulate higher
things: so much so that, if it were possible, they would even attain the perfection
of the highest: but since this cannot be done, one pursues the type of the other.
Hence metals (have the type) of plants, and plants (of) Zoophytes, and this (Zoophyte) of an animal,
but an animal (of) man, and man has the image of God: as the Platonists teach. [Marginal note: Platonists.]
In the same course (says Boethius), time imitates the measure of eternal things, [Marginal note: Boethius]
and that eternity of God, and at the same time, the whole fullness: Which, since they cannot equal, from the whole

**N iij**

--- Page 339 ---
OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

fullness at once into succession, and that [time] declines from immobility to motion.
For this elemental fire imitates the Phoebean light, and that divine and inaccessible [light]: But by as much as the Sun falls short of the supreme light, by so much does this elemental [fire] fall short of the solar [light]: if comparison with infinite things is permitted. Therefore, all inferior things imitate superior things, even the supreme maker: who is deservedly called the archetype, as if the first type of all things, holding primacy in all things, indeed existing as the idea of all images which are seen in inferior things, assimilates more perfectly those things which approach Him more closely. Since therefore God is an intelligible sphere, and this world presents itself entirely to be seen in a spherical figure, man also, who holds the middle ground between God and this world, must necessarily be bounded by the same figure: and imitate that intellectual sphere in the soul, but the sensible one in the body: as this present picture can teach: From whose navel, according to some, but from the chest (as is truer), if a compass is drawn, that circle is perfectly formed: Whence the entire measure of the body is known to originate from roundness and to tend towards it. For the head is round, like a globe and an orb, says La- [Marginal note: Lactant.] ctantius: And the whole body is well-rounded with the most proportionate measure: For from the end of the arm towards the hand, where the pulse beats, to the thumb, a proportion of two and a half times is found in circular measure: And from the neck to the shins, the same proportion: From the thumb to the arm near the shoulder blade, triple: In the same way, from the arm to the fleshy part of the hip, triple.

[Illustration: A male figure standing with arms and legs outstretched, inscribed within a circle, similar to the Vitruvian Man.]

We could also pursue many other things about the numbers and proportions of the human body, both evident and hidden: but I fear that while we discourse on numbers, we may exceed number and measure: and that our slender strengths may succumb to such a burden: since these things lie hidden (yet harmonically arranged) in veins, nerves, and internal organs: which no one has ever found, says Augustine, nor even the cruel diligence of anatomists: [Marginal note: Augusti.] who dissect the bodies of the dead, to examine all hidden things: and from there, learn how and in what places to cure: Yet no one has been able to find the complete numbers by which this harmonic adaptation, as of a certain organ, both internally and externally, of the whole body consists: which perhaps no one has dared to seek. Nevertheless, they exist (as Augustine continues, and Hippocrates and the Pythagoreans teach) [Marginal note: Hippoc. Pythag.] Whence we may at least outline some things (if not all) in this harmonic work.

--- Page 340 ---
TONVS SEXTVS.                                 101
De proportione mensurarum in homine.          Cap. III.

[Decorative initial C containing a figure] SINCE nothing was made rashly, and nothing dissonant in man, but all things
were arranged by these numbers, so that (says Damascenus) his [Marginal note: Damasc.]
members preserve a certain proportion to each other, and to the parts
of the world, like strings on a cithara: Therefore, also concerning the dear work of the supreme Creator
regarding the most harmonious arrangement, and the measurements of the members, we will briefly review a few things
from many: In which every concert, and every harmony will appear complete,
omitting others, by which the intermediates, as if intervals, are filled and perfected:
For the proportion of the whole body to the trunk is sesquioctave (9:8): From the trunk or
chest to the whole legs down to the soles, sesquitertia (4:3): But of the chest from the neck
to the navel, and to the loins or belly down to the end of the trunk, dupla (2:1): The
width of the ilia to the width of the coxa sesquialtera (3:2): In which a tone, a diatessaron,
a diapente, and a diapason result. There is also a triple (3:1) proportion of the head to the neck, where there is a dia-
pason and a diapente simultaneously: And again, of the head to the knee, triple: And the same to the thigh,
or petasus: And thus all members of the human body are proven to be arranged with most exact measurements,
as Hippocrates wisely teaches his son Thessalus: And [Marginal note: Hippoc: Boëtius Moses.]
Boethius discusses this in a longer discourse: Indeed, the Creator was pleased to explain this through Moses
under the type of the ark built by Noah: For it says: The length of the ark shall be
three hundred cubits, its width fifty cubits, and its height thirty cubits: so that the
proportion of length to width is sextuple (6:1), and to height decuple (10:1): By which
measurements the structure of our body is taught: as is not only my opinion, but that
of divine Augustine: Reading whom, after my own discoveries, I rejoiced at the testimony, and favor [Marginal note: Augusti.]
of such a great man: but (to tell the truth) I grieved that someone had stated my discoveries
before me. Thus, the same proportion exists in that ark as in the human body:
But if we also wish to adapt the number, attention must be paid to the measurements
by which some microcosmographers measure the human body itself: For they divide
it by six feet, which are somewhat smaller than common ones: and they call the measure
of one of these feet a hexiped: and they divide this into ten degrees: whence from
six hexipeds sixty degrees result: But they divide each degree into ten, according to some:
but better, as others say, into five minutes: so that all degrees together yield three hundred
minutes: which Moses calls cubits: If these were understood as common cubits, they could not
apply either to the ark or to the human creation: For if referred to the ark, it would have been
very small by common cubits: which are only two spans, having a foot and a half, or six
palms. Therefore, Augustine and Origen wisely opined (so that the ark might be capacious
enough to hold all kinds of animals) that these were Geometric cubits: For a Geometric
cubit contains six common ones: And he was not ignorant of this, who was instructed
in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, among whom this doctrine flourished most greatly.
If we also wish to refer this to the creation of the human body, such a measurement can by no means
be suitable. Therefore, the minutes, and the proportion from
                                                                                                        N v.

--- Page 341 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

resulting from their number, which in such matters is considered by the wiser ones. Therefore, the human body is in length three hundred minutes, in width fifty, and thirty in height: so that it may correspond with the ark: The craftsmanship of which body the supreme artisan cared for more than that of the ark, which was to be constructed by art imitating nature. Moreover, he mentions two windows, one above as a breathing hole for air, and other necessary things to be taken in: The other below for evacuating superfluities. And what more fitting can be said for the human body, to which there is a superior window, yet manifold, through which we receive both necessities for sustaining the body, and light for guiding it? But this is said to be completed with a cubit, indeed a modest measure, since the mouth is small in comparison to other living beings. However, he describes neither the measure nor the function of the lower opening for the sake of decency: but he mentions the unclean raven sent out from the window, and the very clean dove: and that the raven sought foul things, while the dove returned with an olive as a sign of peace. The mystery of these birds is clear: For from our upper
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] window, namely the mouth, very many clean and unclean things come forth. Concerning the unclean things, the heavenly teacher speaks with open discourse, saying: "What comes out of the mouth proceeds from the heart, and these defile a person," namely evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies, blasphemies, and such things rightly signified by the raven, which always delights in unclean things, ill-omened in voice and prognostication. Also from the same window come forth praises, hymns, prayers, confessions, instructions, and good words of many kinds, most excellently described by the very simple dove: And these report a sign of peace to the ark: because
[Marginal note: Sapien.] good words (says the Wise Man) multiply friends, namely divine, angelic, and
[Marginal note: Psalm.] human ones. And how pleasing praise is to Him, God declares in the psalm, saying: "The sacrifice of praise will honor me: and there among, by which I will show him the salvation of God, and peace, and union with Him."

**The Harmony of its Members and Features with Each Other. Chapter IV.**

ET unless we hesitated to be accused of excessive curiosity (which, however, would only happen among common people), we would proceed also to the very features of the face and hands: All of which the most sagacious artisan does not permit to occur by chance in such an elegant body, but with a precise seal, just as he forms the soul and body: and in a similar way, he seals and imprints all things that are adjacent to the body: so that by that artistry, by which he represents this machine with its archetype through the most ordered parts of the body and soul, he might also reveal the art, mastery, and most secret structure and disposition of the human animal by an indication so much more secret, as those very things which it indicates are enclosed by a more obscure veil. Hence many errors in the prognostication of metoposcopists, and more in chiromancy: because in the hands there are inferior and weaker signs. Nor should anyone think that these lead to vices and virtues: because such things absolutely nothing by means of—

--- Page 342 ---
TOMVS SEXTVS.                                                                                                   102

...operate, but indicate the force and dispositions of nature; all of them certainly good, provided
that the mind, as the guide of the whole body, directs them to good by its prudence. And since
man is led by his own free will; hence prognosticators err a second time, if they wish to divine
beyond the disposition of nature, the very morals and effects themselves. That this was proven
in the judgment of Zopyrus [Marginal note: Zopy.], has now become common in schools and public places: Who, when from his
form he judged Socrates to be corrupted not by vices (as is commonly said) but by Venus, a work
necessary for propagation, and hence by those vices which usually arise from bad governance,
and was therefore ridiculed by Socrates' disciples, because they did not recognize such vices in
their teacher [Marginal note: Socrates], Socrates silenced them saying: "Do not ridicule the man: For I would indeed be such
as Zopyrus judged me to be, had I not overcome nature by reason and the precepts of philosophy:
but he would have said better, 'I had directed it to good'." In which sense perhaps is that saying
of the Savior: "Judge not according to appearance." [Marginal note: CHRIST.] Nor is such a doctrine to be entirely
scorned, which proceeds not from superstition, but from the harmonious correspondence of all
parts. Hence also we are compelled to admire and praise the most accurate diligence of the
artist: who also brought together the lineaments and colors of this corruptible body with such art
and such a mystery. Hence men of most serious judgment dedicated themselves to such a
doctrine. Aristotle [Marginal note: Aristote.], leader of the Peripatetics and most sagacious investigator of nature, wrote
much on this subject in a particular treatise, and to Alexander, and in the first book "On the Parts
of Animals". Constantine the African also produced an excellent volume on this matter [Marginal note: Constant. Rasis Galen. Avicenna. Alber. m. Micha. Scotus. Concilia. Pythag.].
Rasis in the second book to Almansor. Galen, Avicenna, Albertus Magnus, Michael Scotus,
Conciliator, and many men of our time, not the least, wrote. Pythagoras also (to return to
ancient and most serious men), looking at adolescents who offered themselves to undertake his
discipline, inquired into their *physiognomonika*, that is, their morals and natures, by a certain
conjecture from the character of their mouth and face, and from the build and habit of their
whole body: And whom he judged suitable, he ordered to be received into his discipline. This
was also practiced by Pharao [Marginal note: Pharao.], king of the Indians: who advised that young men to be admitted to
philosophy should be examined as to what parents they were born from, what morals they were
imbued with, what modesty and affection they were filled with. Therefore, speaking with
Apollonius, he added: "For the eyes indicate most of men's morals." Many things are also placed
in the eyebrows, cheeks, and the whole face: from which wise men and those skilled in nature,
looking as if in a mirror, contemplate what mind and what character they possess. For Lucius
Sulla and Caesar the dictator (as Horace sings and Livy narrates) [Marginal note: Lu. Sy. Caesar. Horat. Livy. Plautus Martial. Juvenal.] often conjectured the hidden
morals of their adversaries, like a fox, by this judgment. Nor without reason do Plautus in his
Comedies describe pimps and criminals, and Martial describes the most wicked Zoilus from a
faulty physiognomy: And that satirist Aquinus says of a common woman: "She offered her
forehead and hand to the seer." But lest this be believed alien to due piety, let us adduce Job,
approved by the testimony of God [Marginal note: Job], who says: "He seals in the hands of men, that each may know his
works: Although"

--- Page 343 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Our teachers, attending more to instructing souls with morals than to the mysteries of nature and the Creator, interpreted [them] in another sense. It is also a common judgment among natural philosophers regarding temperament and the nature's property through colors. For an earthy color, derived from cold and dry, indicates black bile and a Saturnine nature. But a blue color, or one tending towards whiteness, signifies phlegm:
[Marginal note: Avicenna.] For cold (according to Avicenna) makes humid matter white, and makes dry [matter] black. But a reddish color, like thick air reddened by the sun's rays, indicates blood: but a fiery [color], like an inflamed flame, [indicates] choler: Although it (choler) is predominant over others due to its very sharp active virtue, yet due to its subtlety it is easily mixable with another, especially with blood and black bile. Hence if it is mixed with superabundant blood, it is vibrant with redness. But if choler superabounds, it makes [the color] reddish-brown. But if with an equal mixture, reddish-brown: but if choler is burnt with blood, it renders an ash-colored [complexion]; rubicund if blood predominates, and somewhat reddish if choler prevails. But if bile is mixed with black bile, it stains with blackness: if with black bile and phlegm in equal mixture, the color will be ash-colored: If phlegm superabounds, yellow: but if black bile is dominant, grayish-blue: But if it is mixed with phlegm in equal proportion, the color will be lemon-yellow: If by the superabundance of the other, pale or somewhat pale: Hence choler is called red, lemon-yellow, vitelline, black, and similar. Also from actions and operations, the nature of man is conjectured: For slow and solid movement signifies earthy black bile: Fear and inertia, and sluggish work, [signify] phlegm: Cheerfulness and friendly manners [signify] blood: Sharp impulse and fiery strength [signify] choler. Many things of this kind are also handed down by those instructed in the work of nature: but we have touched upon these few things to indicate with what order and what correspondence the supreme Creator constructed this tabernacle and outer shell of the true man dwelling within it: so that from there we may be raised up to contemplate the harmony of that better man himself, which he has within, and with the archetype, just as the exterior figure [has harmony] with the interior man himself.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*That all things are included in man, a general discourse. Chapter V.*

[Marginal note: Moses.] [Large decorated initial Q containing a seated figure] With what fullness and what harmony all things were concluded in this man by the supreme Creator, our Moses, a most upright philosopher, indicated with a single and mysterious word, saying: *The Lord God formed man from the dust of the earth: and breathed into his face, or into his nostrils, the breath of life.* He touches both extremes of all things, so that all intermediate things, which are contained between those extremes, may also be understood as included in man: in whose creation he describes the highest and the lowest reconciled: For the lowest and most diminished of all is the element of earth. But the highest is He [Marginal note: CHRIST.] who said: *I am the life,* namely, diffusing the rays of life into all things.

--- Page 344 ---
TOMVS SEXTVS. 103

the breath of lives, he says, converged in him. And just as in the greater world divine things are united with earthly things by flowing through the heavens, and conversely, by receiving those [earthly things] through the same heavens, which understand the nature of both extremes: so that divine [element] is communicated to man through a certain celestial [element] marked by dust with a secret indication, as also the name of man first expressed indicates, which is אדם (Adam). Where א (Aleph) signifies divinity, ד (Daleth) celestial nature, and ם (Mem) indeed the corruptible body, according to the experts. Therefore, in man there is the corruptible, the celestial, and the divine, or life of every kind: For man lives with the life of elements and stones: to which the vigor of being, growing, and changing is continuously supplied. He lives with metals by a higher life: which have a certain most hidden spirit: therefore, it is either never, or very rarely, found by artisans, however diligently it may be sought. He lives with plants by a vegetative life, with animals by a motive life, with separated minds by a rational or intellective life, and with God indeed by a divine and eternal life: concerning which John [says]: "The life was the light of men." And again: The Supreme [Marginal note: John. CHRIST.] Truth [says]: "I came that they may have life, and have it more abundantly." Rightly, therefore, it is said that the breath of lives, namely of every kind, was breathed into this man, And what Moses secretly hinted at through the two extremes and the middle, Solomon, or Philo, expresses in plain [Marginal note: Solomon Philo.] language, saying: "God brought man out of the mud of the earth, or dust from the earth: and gave him the power of containing all things:" To whom Trismegistus assents: who, when [Marginal note: Trismegistus.] asked by his son about the generation of man, replied: "Man is a certain all, and a certain whole in all, that is, in God, who consists of all things by power, not indeed by composition: but man, consisting by composition, is made of all the powers of things." Augustine, however, contemplated this all-encompassing [Marginal note: Augustine.] containment of things not only in the whole man, but only in the soul: "The soul, made in the likeness of all wisdom," he says, "bears within itself the image of all things, whence it was defined by the [Marginal note: Philosopher.] philosopher as the likeness of all things:" "For it has within itself powers by which it comprehends all things, investigates all things, and is similar to all things:" "For although it is one, it is similar to earth through sense, to water through imagination, to air through reason, to the firmament through intellect, to the heaven of heavens through understanding." And just as God is comprehensible and participable by all: so the soul is capable of all things. But let us return to man himself: who contains all things not only by likeness, but by power and act, with such dignity and consonance: so that Boethius, imitating those ancient fathers, rightly calls him a second kind of music, [Marginal note: Boethius] thus distinguishing concerning him: "that incorporeal vivacity of reason is mixed by a certain co-adaptation: and just as the effective tempering of grave and light voices results in a single consonance." But Mercury calls this a higher harmony, namely, in relation to that which belongs to the body, [Marginal note: Mercury. Zoroaster.] or the corporeal world. Zoroaster (perhaps in the solitude which he inhabited for twenty years) rightly perceived that, so that he said: "Man rejoices because of the harmony in which the mortal body exists, tempered, namely, together with the soul." Of this (as it pleases [Marginal note: Origen.] Origen) Moses makes mention, when he says: "Male and female he created them," understanding, namely, that divine [element] through the male, and through the female this animal body: which is subject to the spirit and that divine [element]: so that, with it (the spirit/divine element) brooding, it may conceive and give birth to such great con

--- Page 345 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

resonant things, because not only man, the work of God, but also the work of man himself may be rendered harmonious and most consonant: Preserving the consonance of both in its proper place, we will pursue that [consonance] which we do not doubt results from all parts of the greater world, by which man is composed.

How great elegance the elements are found in this man. Cap. VI.

[Large decorative initial H] Man, the most perfect and most absolute work of God, and also the Lord of all things, contains those things which are suitable for his composition, as if chosen portions for the Lord, with a more perfect seasoning and sweeter consonance, than those things which are contained in his subordinates. Hence the elements, and all other things composing man, are seen in him as if in a head, with a certain more sublime dignity. Therefore, elements are found consonant even in all coarser things, yet in man, [they are consonant] to a much greater degree, inasmuch as he himself is endowed with a better life: For he is (as we have said) alone among all living beings, a partaker of celestial and divine life. Therefore, elements and all other things in this supreme work attain a certain supreme status. It is not surprising, therefore, if beyond the common consonance which bodily portions and qualities have with each other, and in other composite things, some other modulation, I know not what, is perceived in the well-proportioned complexion of this man, in his colors, figures, and well-arranged features: Which is more clearly discerned by wise and experienced men, [and is] far more pleasing than the harmony of a voice heard by even well-judging ears. And since we have touched upon the proportion of elements and their qualities above, now, omitting those, we will examine that which they hold in a well-constituted man: To whom, so that he may be well-composed, these weights of complexions and humors have been assigned: to Blood eight, to Phlegm four, to Bile two, to Black Bile one, so that everywhere there is a double proportion: but from the first to the third, a quadruple, and to the last, an octuple:
[Marginal note: Appon. Ale. Ap] Although Apponensis, imitating Aphrodiseus, assigns these proportions differently, namely, triple supertripartient fourth, double superbipartient third, and sesquialtera: such as the proportion of fifteen to four, or thirty to eight, and 8 to 3, and 3 to 2. But I know not by what reason he was fortified in doing this, since the ancients and most skilled in harmonic matters never admitted that harmony (according to
[Marginal note: procul.] Proclus) results from superpartient proportions. The body, however, and its humors are most consonant, from whose agreement, if even one should disagree, the whole
[Marginal note: Hippo. Galen. Haliab. Auicena.] body is distempered: as we can most fully learn from Hippocrates, Galen, and Hali Abbas, beyond Avicenna, if we wish to read what the first wrote in "On the Nature of Man," the second in the first [book] of "On Complexions," and the last in the first [book] of "Theorica."
[Marginal note: Pythag.] Pythagoras also taught that man is formed by the concretion and conjunction of humors within forty days, but according to the reason of harmony, a completed and perfect infant is born within seven, or nine, or ten (at most) months.

--- Page 346 ---
TONVS SEXTVS.                                                                      104

What in man himself corresponds to the elements. Chapter VII.
[Decorative initial C] With the elements, beyond their portions which are in the body, the more vital parts of man (says Augustine) agree, namely the exterior senses.
For the eye (because it sees by means of light) corresponds to fire:
and without fire and light it perceives nothing at all. The ears agree with
air, by which sound reverberates: or by its being struck, sound is produced. However, smell and taste [agree]
with water, in which flavor and odor reside: But smell [is found] in those moist exhalations,
by which this space, through which birds fly, is thickened: taste, however,
in those fluid and more corpulent humors: But touch takes to itself earth and thicker
matter: From which Franciscus, deviating too keenly, says
that Augustine spoke to the understanding of others about the watery object of taste itself, never-
theless, by continuing, Augustine gives a reason why taste agrees with water: for he says:
Whatever tastes in the mouth, ips
Augusti.
Au Franc. de Ma.

--- Page 347 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Icy minds live: in one way humans: in another plants: in another metals: in another stones. For the
life of these has only one operation: but the supreme soul presides over the operations
of all lower [beings]. For a stone lives, and operates only with one kind of effect, by attracting,
or repelling, or gladdening, and the like: A plant lives, it grows, and nourishes: an
animal beyond these moves, and feels: But man moreover adds reasoning, and
discourse. Indeed a stone lives: whence it is also called living, and grows, and is joined
together with another stone, or with oysters, glass, or the like: And its work is living,
namely growth, attraction, or expulsion, and whatever else it may be. Bones also
live in the human body: which grow, serve for movement, and their marrow provides
them with life, and nourishment. Nor is porosity required, where there is no growth,
and movement:

--- Page 348 ---
TONE SIXTH. 105

of God, in Leviticus: "The life of the animal is in its blood." [Marginal note: Leviticus.]
From it, when well digested, seed is also produced, from which a living being and an animal are generated. And Trismegistus places the spirit, as the vehicle of life, in the blood: [Marginal note: Trismegistus.]
when it departs, the blood, as its vehicle, either departs with it, or, saddened and grieving over the life so close to it being taken away, it congeals. There are also in man those superior metals, of which the sacred scriptures have made mention in many places:
For there is gold, concerning which the heavenly truth, and the restorer of the inner man, where these things reside, says: [Marginal note: CHRIST 3.]
"I advise you to buy from me gold refined by fire, so that you may become rich." And this is the gold that was commanded to be offered for the construction of the tabernacle, a most expressive type of man. It was also commanded to offer silver with bronze, hyacinth, various skins, wood, frankincense, and gems:
Which silver sometimes turns into dross, as the Lord complains in Isaiah: [Marginal note: Isaiah]
because the wisdom and doctrine of man (even of the divine words, which are called silver purified from the earth, purified sevenfold in the Psalm) [Marginal note: Psalm.]
are often corrupted: namely, when they are mixed with an evil life or some error: But this is more often purified, with the favor of the supreme Craftsman, of whom Malachi says: [Marginal note: Malachi]
"He will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; he will purify the sons of Levi:" who especially ought to be purified in the gold of charity and the silver of wisdom. But above all, priests ought to be purified, who in the law were commanded to carry ואת התמים האורים, that is, Urim and Thummim: where our translation has "doctrine and truth": But they would be better called "illustrations," namely of truth, and "perfections," that is, of all kinds. And these are said by the Apostle to build upon the foundation, [Marginal note: Paul]
which is Christ, gold and silver. Therefore, from silver, if we wish to build well, all error, and human wise pomp, and false invention, and defilement of life must be removed: and then what Solomon says will follow: "Remove dross from silver, and a most pure vessel will emerge." There are also in man bronze, tin, copper, iron, and lead, indeed generated from the same material:
But they lack digestion, decoction, fixation, purity, weight, or some of these, whence they fall short of the perfection of gold or silver. But if the material is digested, decocted, fixed, and brought to purity and a suitable weight: then gold and silver worthy of royal presence will be made, as the supreme Craftsman permits to be done concerning the house of Israel, and consequently concerning all the lost sheep of that house, through Ezekiel, [Marginal note: Ezekiel]
saying: "The house of Israel has become dross to me: All these—bronze, tin, iron, and lead—have become silver dross in the midst of the furnace. Therefore, thus says the Lord: Because you have all turned into dross, therefore I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem, just as silver, bronze, tin, iron, and lead are gathered into a refining pot, so that they may melt when fire is blown upon them," that is, with that fire of which the same Craftsman says: "I have come to cast fire upon the earth." When this was sent, on the fiftieth day dedicated to Him, it happened (says Luke) [Marginal note: Luke]
that when all these were refined, there was one heart and one soul. Then that prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled, where it is said: "I will remove all your tin:" [Marginal note: Isaiah]
and again in the following: "Instead of bronze I will bring gold, and instead of iron, silver."

--- Page 349 ---
**CANTICLE THE FIRST**

& for wood, bronze, and for stones, iron. But in our time (alas, to be lamented)
[Marginal note: Jeremiah] Jeremiah’s prophecy would have to be proclaimed with a tragic voice, in which it is said:
All bronze and iron are corrupted, and the bellows have failed: Lead is consumed in the fire:
the refiner has refined in vain: for their wickedness does not cease: Call them abominable
silver, that is, the insolent: For the Lord has abhorred them: Who, unless He quickly comes
to their aid, soon all will be rendered worthy of perpetual abomination, as John wrote
concerning the Babylonians in his Apocalypse. And Isaiah and Ezekiel concerning others:
Therefore, the refiner must be implored to refine, and purify, and restore the contaminated
to the purity of the ancients: who were in the time of the great purification.

To these let certain mixed minerals sing with wondrous art. Chapter X.

[Large decorative initial V] Beyond the humors are their internal vessels, which hold the middle place between bones
and flesh: Which place in the great world marcasite and alum
[Marginal note: Albertus] possess: which (as Albertus teaches) are intermediate between stones and metals.
Also, the intestines are harder than flesh, but softer than bones, and they feel and live less
than flesh, but more than bones: Hence they are proven to be intermediate between both:
But they are more subject to corruption than flesh, due to the corrupting matter which they contain.
But in the better man, the vessels of humors, that is, of true influxes, are the powers
and natural forces receiving these, namely, the intellective power, will, irascible, and
concupiscible faculties: which all receive illuminating and inflaming influxes, and lead to
work by love or impulse: Which hold the middle place between natural life and divine virtues,
by which we are assimilated to God Himself: just as those intermediates exist between stones
and metals, and intestines between flesh and bones. But these powers are subject to corruption
and such perversion that they are even said to be taken away, as is mystically written
in the book of Maccabees: that Antiochus, namely, carried away from the great temple of God
not only gold, silver, and all precious stones, but also the golden altar, the lampstand of light,
and all the vessels. And what is understood by the golden altar carried away by Antiochus,
who represents the devil and sin, if not the will, in which golden charity resides? And what
by the lampstand of light, if not the intellect, in which shines all the light of the inner man,
both natural and divine? But by the other vessels are understood the other receiving
and operating powers: Which, expressing them more particularly, he adds: that he also took
away the mortars, and concupiscible vessels: Of these, the latter, without any veil, indicate
the concupiscible virtue: But the mortars, with which hard things are crushed, signify the
irascible power: by which an angry man, against vices and his sinning self, reduces hard
affections, and hard and crooked works, to dust: Which alum, and similar biting and
corroding things, effect on superfluous and contaminated flesh: which signifies bad operation,
and bad, corrupted fruits. But such vessels and powers are taken away, or

--- Page 350 ---
**SIXTH TONE. 106**

powers: when they are exercised for other uses than those for which they are appointed: just as in another example we have concerning the vessels carried away from Jerusalem to Babylon: with which the Babylonian king, abusing them in debauchery, felt the hand of the Lord writing a sentence against him on the wall: as we read in Daniel narrating and interpreting. [Daniel]

With which plants may grow green and be nourished. Chapter X. I.

**P**ost metals, the primary kind is that of plants: Whose virtue in flesh and blood, with the vital spirits passing through them in this small world, is quite clearly seen. For a plant is by its very nature (through the mediation of the vital spirit) nourishing and growing. There is also in flesh a vegetative power providing nourishment and manifest growth, in both of which what is lost is most easily repaired: For a cut plant sprouts again, even a rather hard bark: So flesh and skin, when cut, grow again, although often both the skin in flesh and the bark in a plant bear an eternal scar: And both live by a certain most secret spirit: but this plant grows and produces various effects in its leaves, fruits, or root for one who eats it: Flesh, however, not only grows, but is moved by multiple motions, by expanding, contracting, and moving according to place, due to the diversity of muscles existing within it. And if flesh does not grow in those already adult, and brought to the limit of growth, nevertheless, they are continuously nourished, as Galen, Avicenna, Albertus, and others extensively discuss. [Galen. Avicenna Albertus] Therefore, in man are the powers of plants, not only terrestrial, but also celestial. Concerning terrestrial ones, the perceptive doctor Aristotle, speaking in his discourse on the soul, says: that [Aristotle. David] man is an inverted tree, extending the hairs of his head like roots into the upper part, and existing in the upper parts, he takes nourishment through the mouth, just as a plant extends its roots into the earth and downwards, and is nourished from below. And concerning celestial trees, the celestial doctor, after he sang of celestial bread, wine, and oil, he adds: "The trees of Adonai shall be satisfied," for which we have "the trees of the field, and the cedars of Lebanon, which he planted." For he plants these trees, of whom it is said: "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted will be uprooted." [CHRIST.] Concerning which planting Moses had written earlier, saying: "The Lord God planted a paradise of delight from the beginning," [Moses.] which in Hebrew is מקדם, that is, *michedem*: And if the force and mystery of this word *chedem* is well considered, it will seem to signify the Father, who is the beginning, fount, and root of all plants. Therefore, man was planted in the garden of delight by roots, namely, his hairs: concerning which it is said in the Canticles: [Canticles.] "The locks of your head are like royal purple joined to channels": namely, those upper ones, through which all graces flow from the fount of all good things: And such trees, planted beside streams of water, yield their fruit in their season: and their leaf shall not wither: and whatever they do shall prosper: [Psalm.] For then the tree is good: But if, separated from those upper channels, it fixes its roots in earthly and lower things, then it is a bad tree: concerning which the highest Truth says: [CHRIST.] "A bad tree cannot bear good fruit: just as a good tree cannot bear bad fruit."

--- Page 351 ---
**CANTICI PRIMI**

...produce. And that [tree] which produces good fruits, with roots firmly fixed in the planter, at
last, through the fruits and the power of the planter himself, will attain unity
[Marginal note: The Same.] with him, according to the intercession of the mediator, by which he said: "I pray, Father, that just as I
and you are one, so too may these be one," namely, rooted, enclosed, and
glued together, and returned to the same [one] from whom they proceeded.
That animal conditions live in man is evident to all. Chapter XII.
[Decorative initial V] Whatever pertains to animals, if they are contained in man, because
they are manifest, we will run through them more briefly than the subject would require:
For man feels, moves, imagines, fears, grieves, desires,
hates, eats, digests, expels, urinates, sleeps, sighs, shouts,
howls, sings, chatters, walks, jumps, swims, carries burdens, pulls, and with most diverse
food is fed: with herbs, fruits, meats, fish, roots, bread, wine, and water:
Moreover, he makes all kinds of customs and various effects of most diverse

--- Page 352 ---
**SIXTH TONE.** 107

the Golden Verses, and symbols ascribed to Pythagoras (as some believe) committed to writing: Hierocles, explaining these verses, ridicules those who believe that the soul of man [Marginal note: Hierocles] transmigrates into beasts: Therefore, we will examine what those ancient wise men thought concerning such a matter.

What the ancients thought concerning the transmigration of the human soul into beasts, and what the truth of the matter is. Chapter XIII.

**M**etamorphoses of this kind, sung about by Pythagoras and Plato, [Marginal note: Pythagoras, Plato] are well known even to children in schools. For many have sung of this one into a laurel, that one into a wolf, another into a nightingale, another into a swallow, and similar transmutations: But whether Pythagoras, Plato, and the sacred authors from whom they learned, believed these transmutations happened in reality, or merely in affection, is debated by their followers: For some contend that Pythagoras thought so: Others, however, considered those writings handed down by Plato in a poetic manner, such as Xenocrates, Archelaus, and Carneades among the Athenians; and Ammonius and his followers among the Egyptians. [Marginal note: Xenocrates, Archelaus, Carneades, Ammonius, Archelaus] But Carneades, observing the footsteps of Plato himself in the manner of the Sceptics, thought that he wrote rather by questioning than by determining: Archelaus, however, believed that truth was rather described by Plato: Xenocrates, however, [Marginal note: Xenocrates, Ammonius] and Ammonius believed that he spoke some things, or a few things, as true, both concerning the soul and providence, and other such most hidden matters: but that he strove to conceal the rest under various enigmas: Among these, the circuit of souls, and the restitution of things in thirty-six thousand years, according to the complete revolution of the eighth sphere: But he received the transmigration of souls into beasts not as something conceived by himself, but from Egyptian priests, [Marginal note: Egyptian Priests] fabricated (as they say) for the expiation of souls: Then sung about in verses by Orpheus, Empedocles, and Heraclitus. [Marginal note: Orpheus, Empedocles, Heraclitus, Plato, Iamblichus, Porphyry, Proclus, Hermias, Syrianus] Those, however, who thought correctly, and pursued the true opinion of Plato, utterly rejected the transmigration of the human soul into beasts. Iamblichus achieved this, and Porphyry, who does not permit the soul to be torn from the center in which it is once fixed. But Proclus, Hermias, and Syrianus considered it a horrible crime for a celestial soul to be cast into beasts: because a human body does not receive any other soul than a human one: nor is a human soul inclined into any other body than a human one. Nor is it right (they say) for a rational soul to fall into the body of an animal lacking reason, as such an impious generation is forbidden by divine law: Whence Porphyry and Iamblichus, [Marginal note: Porphyry, Iamblichus] having refuted their error, conclude that a man corrupted in morals should by no means be called an ass, but ass-like; nor a lion, but lion-like. And before these, let us hear what Timaeus Locrus, [Marginal note: Timaeus] a distinguished Pythagorean, and also Plato in his *Laws*, [Marginal note: Plato] thought: Just as (they say) we sometimes restore bodies to health with virulent and lethal [remedies] when we cannot with the most wholesome ones, so we restrain souls with figurative words—
O iij

--- Page 353 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...tive and metaphorical (words), since they cannot be governed by truth. It is therefore necessary that many afflictions are said to be inflicted, namely, that wicked souls may enter the feminine abodes of the fearful; and finally, given over to disgrace, to be afflicted by entering the bodies of monstrous beasts, gory with human blood; that the souls of the lustful enter the forms of pigs or wild boars; that the souls of those pursuing light and lofty things, and of those seeking airy things, (enter) the form of birds; but of the sluggish and inert, the form of aquatic creatures. But all these things fate has assigned to a second birth. So far Timaeus. Hence concerning these transmigrations, understanding correctly, these wise men rightly opined, indeed, they faithfully recounted what they had received from divine and prophetic doctrine: where transmutations of this kind are taught without any veils: "Man passes away in an image," (says David).
[Marginal note: Psalm.]
[Marginal note: Paul] Also concerning the transition of the body into something better, the Apostle says, speaking with the Philippians: "We await the Savior, our Lord Jesus Christ, who will transform the body..."

--- Page 354 ---
**TONE SIXTH. 108**

very many, and whatever other struggles are proclaimed about him. And then the soul of man, which, constrained by the evil customs of beasts, was led around by an imaginary brute spirit, freed and purified by a long course of time and great labors, released from the conditions of beasts, may return, worthy, to the heavenly seat.

**What foreigners have stated about particular transmutations with wonderful agreement with ours. Chapter XIV.**

[Decorative woodcut initial V] Everywhere we have harmonious witnesses about this transmigration: For Hera- [Marginal note: Heracl.]
clitus said that the soul travels by necessary succession from the highest to the lowest, and conversely, from the lowest to the highest; so that that celebrated saying among the Chal- [Marginal note: Chaldei Euantes]
deans, about which Euantes writes, may be true, namely, that man is an animal of a dissolving nature, having no proper image of his own, but very many foreign and adventitious ones. For man to be transformed into the supreme and divine nature through excellence of virtue, both Aristotle in the Ethics and Plotinus in the book [Marginal note: Aristo. Plotin.]
On Virtues assert. Whom the whole crowd of poets follows, singing that men have become Gods. And our David, an excellent prophet, sings: [Marginal note: Psalm.]
"I said, 'You are gods.'" And Paul, speaking with the Ephesians, says: "He who is joined to God becomes one spirit with Him." [Marginal note: Paulus]
Pythagoras, a semi-theologian and semi-philosopher, interjects, [Marginal note: Pytha.]
saying: "If, having laid aside the body, you ascend to the heavens, you will be an immortal God." And Malachi openly testifies that John was changed into an angel, introducing God saying: [Marginal note: Malax.]
"Behold, I send my angel before your face." Whom (these angels) the ancients used to call Gods: To whose rank even the gentiles themselves report many were elevated: and they reached such a madness that they even adored such men as Gods with a higher honor than that with which we venerate our own, whom we call saints, that is, confirmed in union with God: For we only implore these as intercessors to God, to whom they are united: But they worshipped them as Gods.
However, many more fall into the worse part: because (as Heraclitus implies) [Marginal note: Heracl.]
since it is no small labor to dwell perpetually in the heavenly abodes, to be wearied, and to converse with the Gods, and to be perpetually subject to them, therefore he easily asserts that the soul, partly enticed by the desire for rest, partly uplifted by the hope of ruling, slides down to lower things. To which, being cast down, it is sometimes (as Empedocles says) changed into a plant, as Ovid sings of Daphne turned into a laurel. [Marginal note: Emped.]
The poet (Virgil) also describes Polydorus's soul crying out from a tree trunk. [Marginal note: Ouidi. Virgilius]
From Aristotle too, but more clearly from the Gospel in many places, [Marginal note: Euange.]
we can learn that men are called trees, now good, now bad: Good ones, however (as we touched upon before), are said to be planted in God's garden: But bad ones are in this depressed earth, certainly sterile and unfruitful, and awaiting excision so that they may be cast into the fire to be burned: And about these the Baptist cries out: [Marginal note: Ioã. Bap.]
"Now the axe is laid to the root of the tree." And sometimes the wicked are also said to be changed into stones, as the same Baptist says: "God is able from these stones to raise up children to Abraham." [Marginal note: Idem Moses.]
Moses also narrates that Lot's wife was turned into a pillar of salt: For he who is dedicated only to nourishment and is sluggish day and night, lives like a plant: But he who is hardened, like

**O iiij**

--- Page 355 ---
OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

...he who neither receives the word of God nor heavenly graces, so as to be softened at any time, is deservedly called a stone. Indeed, that woman who was given as an example and seasoning for the obedient is described as having been turned into salt. Moreover, almost countless authors on both sides are in agreement that men have been changed into animals.
[Marginal note: Aristo.] Aristotle writes in his Politics that a man depraved in morals is not only changed into a beast, but becomes worse than it.
[Marginal note: Plotin.] Plotinus, discussing the transmutation into animals and plants in his work 'On Each Man's Own Daemon,' says: "Whoever has preserved human nature, are born again as men; but whoever has used only sense, return as brute animals, yet in such a way that those who have used sense especially along with anger, emerge as wild animals; and whoever uses sense through lust and pleasure, return as lecherous and gluttonous animals. But if they have lived not so much by sense, along with these, as by the degeneration of sense, along with them, plants sprout forth: for only, or especially, the vital principle flourished in them, and all their care was to be changed into plants. But those who have lived too much delighted by musical melodies, not depraved in other respects, are reborn as musical animals: And those who have reigned without reason, become eagles, unless they are infected by some depravity: But he who has attained civil virtue, returns as a man." So far Plotinus in the same place, but in the work he published 'On Providence,' he adds these things: "The seminal reason of an ox is in no other matter than that of an ox, similarly the seminal reason of man existing in a human subject is neither diminished nor increased, which was granted by nature from the beginning." Indeed, it is not diminished according to the subject, or the specific reason, but it is changed according to affections:
[Marginal note: Pythag. Academ. Sa. scri.] To which all Pythagoreans and Academics agree. But we find these same things written in many places of sacred scripture, beyond those which have been adduced above.
[Marginal note: Petrus.] For to those badly initiated, the Apostle says: "Like dumb animals, going as you were led."
[Marginal note: Isaias] And cursing the darkened and ungrateful people through Isaiah, the Lord says: "The ox knows its owner, and the ass its master's crib: but Israel has not known me," having become worse than beasts, that is.
[Marginal note: Salomon] And in Proverbs, Solomon now calls man a lion, a tiger, a bear, or a wild boar: now a hare, a greyhound, or a rabbit: now an ant, a hedgehog, a serpent, or a spider: now an eagle, a gecko, a rooster, or another bird: and in many such metaphors, distinguishing the manners of men by the beasts to which they are likened, he describes them. But lest we exceed too much in explaining all such passages from external authors and sacred scripture,
[Marginal note: Moses,] we will adduce what Moses summarily and perfectly concluded under the type of the ark, which Noah is said to have built by God's command with great mystery.
Moses describes all things contained in man by sacred art, in Noah's ark. Chapter XV.

[Decorative initial 'N' depicting a figure, likely Noah, surrounded by animals within an ark-like structure.]
[Marginal note: Scythæ Berosus] Noah, or Noach (as the Hebrews and Chaldeans say), the father of all human gods, major and minor, the renewer of the human race, and the seed of the world, named by the Scythians, also called Janus (if Berosus's abridgement is to be believed), was he to whom by a great type...

--- Page 356 ---
**TONVS SEXTVS.** **109**

with great mystery God said: "The end of all flesh has come before me, for the earth is filled with iniquity, or rapine:" as the Hebrew truth has it: "For man had seized the lower portions, whence he had fallen from his state." Therefore, for his reparation, the High Priest said to him, who alone was found righteous in his generations: "Make for yourself an ark of smoothed wood:" for which in Hebrew it is found "de lignis גפר," that is, *gopher*, which signifies cypress, as some prefer, and according to others, pine dripping with pitch: Hence Jerome in his commentary on Genesis [Marginal note: Hieron.] says: "Instead of 'squared' or 'smoothed,' in Hebrew we read 'bituminated' (pitched)." In which ark Augustine, the wise Hebrews, and all who think correctly, believe man to be described in all his parts: [Marginal note: August. Hebræi] Since we have sufficiently explained the divisions of this ark and of man a little earlier, let us come to those things which are contained within it, and consequently within man: To whom it is said: "Enter you into the ark, and all your house:" For man ought to enter within himself, if he wishes to consult for his salvation, just as it was said to Abram: "Go to yourself," for which we have, "Go out from your land." And in John's Gospel it is said: "The disciples went again to themselves," [Marginal note: Ioan.] having known, that is, that Jesus was resurrected: For they had departed from themselves through the unbelief contracted from his death and passion. So also concerning that prodigal young man, who had gone into a distant region, Ambrose says: "What is it to go further, but to go outside of oneself?" [Marginal note: Ambrof.] Therefore man enters into himself, when he returns to his heart, in which chamber, gathered and with the door closed (according to the Savior's command), prepared and disposed, he prays to the Father. [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] He is also commanded to enter with his children, and all his family, which, explaining, he says: "Your wife, and your sons, and your sons' wives with you." The sacrament of marriage is greatly celebrated in sacred writings, and to it the kingdom of heaven is compared. Nor did Christ wish to reveal any sacrament to the Samaritan woman, unless her husband was summoned: "Go," he said, "and call your husband:" And to the husband the Wise Man says: "Enjoy life with the wife whom you love:" Who should not be barren, but like an abundant vine, and producing fitting fruits: concerning which it is said: "Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of penance:" and "the kingdom of heaven is at hand for you." Perhaps in this sense Mercury taught that one should beware of a man who had neither wife nor son. [Marginal note: Mercu. CHRI STVS.] Hence also Christ, the leader and teacher of all, no less by deeds than by words, took a wife, by whom he begot all of us: and of whom it is said in the Apocalypse: "And his wife has prepared herself." [Marginal note: Apocal.] But who this wife is, whom we ought to bring into the ark, is sufficiently expressed in the name of Noah's wife, if those things are true which are found in the monuments of the Scythians and Chaldeans, namely that she was called Tythea the Great, and Aretia, that is, earth, which the Hebrews call ארץ *erez*: and the Chaldeans call ארקא *arca*: With which earth, as with the mother of all, our spirit and mind, united, makes us fruitful. Hence, to man immediately brought forth with his wife, the oracle commands, saying: "Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it," that is, our animal [nature]: Which [animal nature] having been reduced to servitude, we may be made worthy to adhere to that wife who descended from heaven, prepared by God, like a bride adorned for her husband. And this is done by repu-
O v.

--- Page 357 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

the former being repudiated, just as our emperor Christ taught by his deeds: who that wife, in whom were contained those things which sanctified the animal man, namely the synagogue, either dismissed or converted into a better and spiritual wife, in whom the spiritual man might be sanctified, by his excellent virtue. Scripture continues, enumerating the sons whom man ought to lead into the inner chambers of the mind: Whose names are Shem, Ham, and Japheth. The name Shem signifies that by which a thing is expressed and named, denoting that fruits ought to be expressed and named, and known to God: who calls all by name, and numbers the hairs of the head. The next is Ham, which the Hebrews write [unclear Hebrew word] and signifies heat: by which works ought to be fervent, lest they be lukewarm or cold, but hot and fervent. And because works ought not to be presented to the highest beauty unless they are beautiful, therefore the name of the third son is called Japheth, which is interpreted as "dilated" or "beautiful." Works are also called married, because they ought to be mixed with divine virtue: which grace,

--- Page 358 ---
TONE SIXTH. 110

were commanded to be made, or, as the Hebrew text has it, lower, middle, & upper: How
these divisions are exactly in the human body, let the moderns say, a- [Marginal note: Neote.]
mong whom these things are trivial: For below the diaphragm is the lower belly with the inte-
stines: and from there up to the neck, an intervening space for the heart, & liver, & other vessels
of animal virtues. Above the neck, however, is the head, the third, & supreme dwelling,
in which resides the reasoning virtue, & intellect with the internal, & external senses,
as if they were its chamberlains: But this dwelling is still divided into three
chambers: so that those three guests can inhabit it, of whom the middle one says:
I will enter, & sup with him: And again concerning the others he says: We will come to him, & make our
dwelling with him, I, namely the Father, & the Holy Spirit. And for so many [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
guests dwelling in this human world, it is commanded that from all
foods that can be eaten, they be introduced both by animal, & rational virtues, as well as by divi- [Marginal note: Idem]
ne ones: because no affection in man ought to be left fasting from good, & lawful foods:
otherwise they crave those foods which are not permitted, or devouring themselves from hunger,
they would disturb the ark, & all things existing within it with restlessness, & strife: For it is
impossible (says Jerome) for the human soul not to love something: therefore, [Marginal note: Hiero.]
foods, & works are commanded to be prepared for all our powers: in which we can be fed, &
delighted. And what was said through the trees planted in the paradise of delight, &
dedicated to man for food before he suffered expulsion, & the flood, is now hinted at through
all kinds of provisions: By these foods also the heavenly guest promises to be fed,
while he openly declares that he will enter to sup with us. Nor do I think it should
be passed over, what is said, that the ark, namely, was smeared with pitch inside, &
outside, lest indeed from any cracks, or small openings, the blast of winds escape:
namely, of passions, & ill-restrained affections: or the waves of temptations enter:
Nevertheless, in the human ark there are openings, & pores, which the most sagacious craftsman
arranged for the purgation of nature, & for other necessary things.

Why unclean animals are said to have been introduced into the ark by twos of each sex, but clean ones by sevens. Chapter XVI.

Why unclean animals are commanded to be led into the ar- [Marginal note: Orige.]
k in pairs, although (as Origen says) it is difficult to explain, nevertheless (if
I dare say anything in these most difficult matters) I believe it to be this: because every
unclean affection draws its origin from concupiscence, & anger: Therefore,
the ministers of God (says Alcinous) established the irascible part in the heart, the concu- [Marginal note: Alcinous]
piscible part in the place which is between the navel, & the kidneys, binding it there
like a wild beast bound with a silver chain: so that free will, which is also in the heart,
may moderate it: & direct it at will: and hold it bound & incarcerated: so that it can do
nothing, except as much as the true Noah permits. And unless we moderate the impulses
of both beasts with these reins, they would swiftly carry everything headlong with them.
And unclean affections are well designated by the number two: which number (as Jerome
says, arguing against Jovinian) is inauspicious, & evil, [Marginal note: Hieron.]

--- Page 359 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

& pertaining to matter, which is the source and origin of all evils. Therefore, on the second day, not without cause, that delightful word was passed over in silence: "And God saw that it was good." From this also male and female are said to be introduced, because in both types of human unclean forces are active, by which all things are propagated: but in the lower man those are said to be infected by material nature, while in the higher man, through commixture with it. But the Creator acted very kindly with us by inserting in us two unclean affections and two affections to be cleansed; but seven clean ones: both because they are more numerous, and because they are contained in a most celebrated number: which signifies the whole and the universe (says [Marginal note: Augusti.] Augustine), because it is composed of the entirely odd number, namely three, and of the entirely and first even number, namely four, or from the first masculine number and the first feminine number: which, when intertwined, yield twelve, indeed a divine and celestial [Marginal note: Procul.] number, says Proculus: by which the signs of the heavens, the presiding intelligences, the revolution of the great name, and many other things (as we shall say immediately) are distributed. But those parts, just as when intertwined they yield twelve, so when combined they constitute seven, indeed a number by which purifications are distributed: so that not without mystery those ancient fathers established many things for the expurgation of sins through this septenary, namely

--- Page 360 ---
**SIXTH TONE.**
**111**

For if Ptolemy's doctrine is true, that the aspects of this terrestrial world are subject to celestial faces, [Marginal note: Dauid / Ptolem.] as terrestrial Scorpio is under celestial Scorpio: and the bull, or ram living here under celestial images: much more does man, who is a whole world, agree with all the aspects of the heavens: so much so, that he receives and contains all the powers of the heavens themselves, and of the intelligences presiding over them.
Whence Trismegistus says: [Marginal note: Trism.] "And since man contained in himself the power of all things, he perceived the works of the seven governors: And they, rejoicing in the meditation of the human mind, each made man a participant of their own order:" But he speaks more profoundly than appears on the surface of the letter. How man draws from the planets themselves, Plato, Plotinus, and the other Academics teach. "The soul (they say) in its descent from Saturn receives ratiocination, intelligence, and specu-" [Marginal note: Plato. / Plotin. / Academ.]

--- Page 361 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

it is said, when from cold feet the belly and chest ache, which correspond to the same triplicity: whence a remedy applied to one cures the other: For when the feet are warmed, the pain in the belly ceases: and there are many such things which prove other trine, square, and sextile aspects, and all the power of the heavens to be in the human
[Marginal note: Mercu.] body, just as in the celestial: This did not escape that Thrice-Great (Hermes), who, conversing with his son Tat, said: "This tabernacle, O son, is constituted by the zodiac, which consists of the number twelve:" And not only planets and signs, which are in the eighth heaven, but also the power of the *primum mobile* and the Empyrean is contained in man. Now let us proceed concerning the images of the eighth heaven, and those corresponding to the ninth.

Whence each of the signs of the zodiac has its denomination, and what those animals signify, from which they are named, along with the Sun. Chapter XVIII.

[Marginal note: Macro.] [Large decorative initial P] Macrobius touched lightly upon the reasons for a few denominations from Academic sources; to which we will add those things which have been drawn from better streams. Therefore, the first sign is called Aries: because that animal (the ram) leans on its left side for six winter months, but from the vernal equinox, on its right: So also the Sun at the same time traverses the right Hemisphere, and for the rest, the left. Moreover, the ram is the head and leader of sheep, and that sign
[Marginal note: Astron.] named after it is the head of the signs, and the leader of the months of the year. Whence Astronomers prognosticate the events of the entire year from the Sun's entry into the first part of Aries. From the same also rural philosophers prophesy, who (as Isaac reports) if they see older rams more inclined to copulation than younger ones at the appointed time: from this they infer a happy and prosperous course of the year, and the best temperament. Taurus succeeds, which Egyptian worship shows to be related to the Sun for multiple reasons, either because in Heliopolis they especially worship a bull consecrated to the Sun (which they call Nerites): or because the Apis bull in the city of Memphis is received as an image of the Sun: or because in the town of Herminth they worship a bull consecrated to the Sun in a magnificent temple of Apollo, calling it Pachim, notable for miracles suitable to the nature of the Sun: For it is asserted to have changed colors every hour, and it is said to be shaggy with bristles growing in the opposite direction, contrary to the nature of all animals: whence it is held as an image of the sun shining on the opposite part of the world. But since these things savor of rather pure fables, other reasons must be sought: For the bull is the king of herds, just as the ram is of flocks, the lion of wild beasts, and man of all rational creatures: whose images the Sun, king of planets, claims for its dwellings: And from Aries, whose virtue is in the head, it ascends to Taurus, which chiefly contains its power in the neck: and from the king of flocks to the king of herds, and from there it proceeds to the king of those using reason (man): And from here they call Gemini, always succeeding with alternating deaths, as antiquity feigned concerning Castor and Pollux: For whether life pursues man or death succeeds, he always lives in the better part, which remains eternal, while the souls of beasts dissolve into nothing: Man himself also lives this mortal life through a perpetual succession of individuals. Of Gemini

--- Page 362 ---
**TONUS SEXTUS.** 112
moreover it is called a sign, either because, when the Sun has arrived there, it doubles its strength: or because it then doubles its journey by descending, just as it had ascended. Therefore Cancer follows, an animal indeed retreating, because when the Sun has reached its first threshold, it begins to retreat to the lowest points. Cancer is also, above all animals, lunar, deservedly the domicile of the Moon: And this is like the breast of the sky, while Gemini are the arms. Leo succeeds, like the shoulders and sides of the same sky, in which sign, as if in its own domicile, and an image especially dedicated to itself, the Sun burns above all seasons, although its rays are more bent than when it passed through Cancer and Gemini: For from there it receives strength, as if from a place named by Leo as preeminent among the solar animals: For here it seems to derive its nature from the substance of the sun: whence from the intemperance of heat it often languishes, just as our bodies do, when the Sun is in the same sign: Therefore then physicians forbid medicines, phlebotomy, and the diminution of blood, unless necessity compels it. The succeeding sign is rightly called Virgo: because then the Sun, from which the principal denomination of the signs is made, seems to lose all power of producing: and to arrive at a certain sterility: because as it passes through there, already the crops, wine, and fruits of the earth are ripe, and seem to close the fertility of that part of the earth. The sign that follows afterwards is rightly called Libra: because then the weighing or measuring of collected fruits begins: And the Sun's course is divided into equal diurnal and nocturnal portions: The balance also seems to weigh the time, rejoicing in the greatest temperance between heat and moderate cold. To this is added Scorpio, a venomous animal, more troublesome than others, by how much more severe a torment it inflicts: It has venom in its tail: it always strikes with an oblique blow: And it seems wonderful that it never lacks venom, especially at midday, when the Sun burns with ardors, although Phoebus is a physician bringing healing to all: Which, however, to those who inspect it sanely, ought not to seem at all absurd, since all things, the more pernicious venom they have, so much the more efficacious an antidote (they also have): For the flesh of the viper or tiri, from which theriac is made, offers a remedy for virulent things: although it itself boils with poisonous ichor: Likewise, the flesh of the scorpion itself is effective even for those poisoned by it: Thus, wherever one extreme arises, another proceeds from it: For God himself, supremely good, brings forth these testimonies about himself: "I will strike, and I will heal: I will kill, and I will make alive." [Marginal note: Deuter.] And we have said of the Sun, that sometimes it is Dionysius, tearing apart, and sometimes Phoebus, reuniting: Nor is it wonderful, therefore, if for its domicile it sometimes takes on the scorpion. Here perhaps there is an allusion to that scorpion, about which we read in Joshua and in the book of Numbers: [Marginal note: Iosube Nume.] "The boundary of Judah will be from the end of the Salt Sea, from the gulf that looks towards the south, and it goes out from the south to the ascent of the scorpion, or scorpions, as the Hebrew truth has it:" Which ascend higher than the letter on the surface presents: For Scorpio is earthly, celestial, and supercelestial, from which the sun receives some power. There are also scorpions in the lower abyss, about which the highest Truth says: [Marginal note: CHRISTUS.] "Behold, I have given you power to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy:" For not concerning the sign

--- Page 363 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Nor indeed concerning the sign, whether celestial or a small animal which anyone can easily crush, was he speaking only. Sagittarius is added, where the Sun, being present in winter, directs arrows of hail and rain at us. It is also called a monster, degenerating in its hinder part, because the sun, proceeding thither, seems to degenerate in light, influence, and effect. Capricorn follows, whom the Hebrews name with the express word גדי, that is, gedi, which we can interpret as "kid," which is an animal: it always tends towards high places while it feeds, indeed a house suitable for the sun, while it begins to ascend. For entering there, it changes its path from descent to ascent, and therefore that place is called "tropic" according to τροπὴν, which is "conversion." Thence it proceeds to Aquarius, which in Hebrew is called דלי, that is, deli: and this is interpreted as "bucket" or "drawing vessel." Indeed, most aptly is it then said to be contained in a drawing vessel, when the earth and all lower things begin to draw from celestial sources the power already contracted, just as the heavens draw from supermundane fountains. Finally there are the Fish (Pisces), in which the zodiac terminates, which the Sun also consecrated, so that it may be known to provide life not only to aerial and terrestrial animals, but also to those whose existence is immersed in the waters: For so great is the power of the Sun, that by penetrating even the most hidden things, it vivifies them even to the lowest parts of the earth. Indeed, happily for man, the sun's course ends in the fish, whom the redeemer of the human race and the true Sun of the world ate, having completed the course of life, and transformed into a better lot. In the same series also, the Divine life and influence, signified by the Sun, descends into
[Marginal note: Psalm.] man, beginning from the head down to the feet and fringes: as the Psalmograph sings under another type, saying: "Like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard: that went down to the skirts of his garments." Therefore it begins from the head, or from Aries, it passes through Taurus, because through the strength of the neck it is diffused to the arms, and the twin parts of double virtues and operations. And it passes through the Cancerian breast, and the virile, and Leonine strength of the shoulders and sides: But coming to the loins, it renders those fountains sterile from the works of the flesh: If, however, the preservation of nature demands it, at least the succeeding Libra moderates pleasure, and by the influence of the superior Scorpion, it restrains the extreme sting of the tail of this scorpion, that is, by preferring the ultimate (things), by which it mortifies the ultimate pleasures. It is carried
[Marginal note: Job] over the loins, and the fomentations of the flesh through the archer's arrows: Concerning which it is said in Job: "The arrows of the Lord are arrayed against me." For in the superior part, favoring
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] virtues, and in the interior part, restraining ones are sought: Finally, that celestial power bends the knees through Capricorn, whence it may begin to ascend again, according to the Ruler's edict: "He who humbles himself will be exalted." Also sustaining the legs, through the draughts of heavenly things, for running in the way of God's commandments. But the power of the fish, traversing the paths of the sea, leads our feet through these worldly waters to that exalted sea, and to the waters which, existing above the heavens, continually praise the


--- Page 364 ---
SIXTH TONE. 113

according to that Gospel saying: "I have prepared my oxen, and my fatlings are killed:" But the fish as the last dish, towards which the feet of our affections should always tend.

Why those signs, and the principal joints in man, are distributed in the number twelve. Chapter XIX.

[Decorative initial I containing a coat of arms] N the archives of the wise, we find two progressions of things: one indeed through the ternary, seeking the lowest from the highest; the other, however, through the quaternary, ascending from the lowest to the highest. And Plato followed the former, from divine things to inferior ones; [Marginal note: Plato.] while Aristotle, pursuing the latter from the lowest to the highest, proceeded only as far as he could be led by hand through his senses from these things. [Marginal note: Aristote.] The quaternary, therefore, is an elemental number, and is also found to be divine with great mystery, according to the fitness of the thing: as Orpheus [Marginal note: Orph.] and those wiser than him said. And this (quaternary) gives birth to the indefatigable and immutable number ten (as the same Orpheus continues), beyond which no number is given. The quaternary itself, however, complicated by the ternary, leads to the number twelve, the first increasing number, and more celestial and divine than terrestrial: whence all increasing things, and very many divine things, are distributed by it. This number is also composed of two first perfect sixes, namely: and it is the first increasing number, and this abounds in sixteen by four, whence that happy increase comes, because it is made by the square of equilateral sides, and the parent of ten: Therefore, deservedly, Plato in the Phaedo, and in many places, [Marginal note: Plato.] venerates this number, and by it divides the supernal world into twelve faces, and as many colors, yet with a more perfect mark: For he asserts that stones, fruits, trees, flowers, and such things are found in the supernal region with such perfection that they have not yet come to our knowledge, nor can we even imagine them: For these things they had received from those who were taught by divine oracles: John, [Marginal note: Ioan.] also instructed by these things, at the end of his Patmos vision, relates that the tree of life produces twelve fruits every month: He also describes that supernal city constructed with twelve foundations of precious stones, with the twelve names of the Apostles, and distinguished by twelve gates, over which as many angels presided: and he mentions the names of the twelve tribes inscribed on them. Moreover, on every side of it, he completes a measure of twelve thousand stadia, as the prophet Ezekiel had done before. Plato, therefore, following these, in order to conform his Republic to the celestial city, arranges the fields in his 'Laws' with this number, and in the book 'On the Republic', he solidifies the duodenary, and reduces it to a body, namely 1728, to which, when a Republic or dominion arrives, if discipline flourishes, it achieves its end (as he asserts): and if it progresses further, it gradually declines for the worse by a fatal law, especially as discipline degenerates: And he considered the solid of this number to be the end of the Republic, since it is the first increasing number, and beyond a solid, no further progress is given: then

--- Page 365 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...then because it draws the whole celestial influx: For by the millenary, which is the solid of the denarius, is denoted the manifold thousandfold influx of the star-bearing heaven, corresponding to the number of stars residing therein. But in the seven hundred are designated the powers of the seven planets, and by twenty-eight the favor of the Moon. For its motion, distant from the course of other wandering stars, is considered as solitary, completing its revolution on the twenty-eighth day, when it returns to the same point of the Zodiac; but on the twenty-ninth to the sign [Plato.], at which time it has advanced nearly one degree. Plato therefore celebrates this number, emulating Mercury; and both (Plato and Mercury) emulate Moses, and the deifying prophets, indeed God Himself: who chose that Israelite family of twelve, which He always commanded to stand thus divided, and to have twelve princes set over it; and as many stones to be placed in the bottom of the Jordan, while they crossed through it to the promised land; and commanded stones of the same number to be fixed on the breastplate of the high priest. Moreover, twelve loaves of faces, for which we have the loaves of proposition, are placed in the ark; and the altar is constructed with as many stones. By which number also the bronze sea [Salomon] made by Solomon for the washing of offerings, was supported by oxen. Also, after crossing the Red Sea, twelve springs were prepared for that chosen family in Elim; and twelve scouts were sent to explore the promised land. To the goal of which number Christ, the wisdom of God, separates the Apostolic family, and sets them over the twelve tribes. And those sealed and chief elect are enumerated by John by twelve thousands. He also describes the Queen of this people crowned with twelve stars. When the loaves multiplied, fragments are collected in twelve baskets. Moreover, the day is divided by twice twelve hours, and the Moon daily traverses twelve degrees; and Jupiter, balancing all things, completes its own course in twelve years. Hence not without cause Timaeus Locrus [Tim.lo.] describes the whole world with twelve faces. And if we descend to lower things, many growing things proceed by this number. The hare and the rabbit, most fertile, generate twelve times a year. The camel carries its fetus for twelve months. The peacock [Plato] lays twelve eggs. Furthermore, Plato squares the millenary and solidifies the hundreds into ten times a hundred thousand, so that he may also enumerate the supernal, and ministering, and assisting intelligences, according to Daniel's prophecy. Of which (intelligences) the chief princes, by the duodenary multiplied by its half, namely the senary, are distributed into seventy-two: By which number both the elders in the figurative people, and the disciples in the true, are represented, according to the number of languages [Sapien. Hiero.]. To which languages (as we can learn from ancient wise men) as many angelic princes preside: Which things are somewhat discussed by Jerome concerning that psalm verse, "clothed in varied raiment". But by assigning to each its senary, not [Procul.] without mystery, twelve more powerful princes remain: Therefore Proclus asserts this number to be consecrated to the Gods, and to those kinds (of beings) which proceed from them. Hence heaven, the seat of divinity, is divided into twelve signs, over which preside twelve chief angels, supported by twelve irrigations of the great name of God.

--- Page 366 ---
VOLUME SIX. 114

That poets, imitating like apes, devised twelve deities, which they assigned to those signs: [Marginal note: Poets]
Pallas to Aries, and consequently to the human head; Venus to Taurus,
to the neck and throat; Phoebus specifically to Gemini, and to the arms; Mercury
to Cancer, and to the chest; Jove specifically to Leo, to the shoulders or shoulder blades; Ceres
to Virgo, and to the loins; Vulcan to Libra, and to the buttocks; Mars to Scorpio, and to the private parts;
Diana to Sagittarius, and to the thigh; Vesta to Capricorn, and to the knees; Juno
to Aquarius, and also to the legs; and Neptune truly to Pisces, and to the feet.
Whence Manilius sings:
[Marginal note: Mani.]
    Pallas watches over the Ram, Cytherea over the Bull;
    Phoebus over the famous Twins, Cyllenian Mercury over the Crab,
    Jupiter himself and with the Mother of the Gods rules the Lion:
    The grain-bearing Virgin is Ceres', and the crafted Libra
    is Vulcan's, the warlike Scorpion clings to Mavors:
    And Diana [watches over] the hunting man, though of horse-part,
    And Vesta cherishes the narrow stars of Capricorn:
    And Aquarius, opposite to Jupiter's [sign], is Juno's sign:
    And acknowledges its own

--- Page 367 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

We could discuss many things: but we leave those to be more fully explained in their proper place.
Correspondence of qualities with the planets, and the eighth heaven. Chapter XX.
[Decorative initial E] There exist in the human body qualities and complexions having their own consonance with the planets and the starry heaven: For, postponing that manifest consonance which this (body) has with them in its triplicities, let us come to that which Saturn has a correspondence with black bile: so that those in whom this prevails are called Saturnine, and so closely follow its motion and influence, that Saturn seems to be present in all their operations: And, drawn by the same (Saturn) by a certain consonant force, they always delight in Saturnine things, in solitude, contemplation, deep imagination, an appetite for gathering (things) from fear brought on by a cold and dry earthly nature, and in such decrees of Saturn. Jupiter, however, has its own harmony with blood, and with humid and warm air, and consequently with life, which especially resides in such (conditions): And who, by its harmonious expansion, with an equalizing force, makes its Phaethonteans tractable...

--- Page 368 ---
VOLUME SIX. 115

...to things which we understand, and full of ideas of what we are about to do. And so that heaven itself might be shown to embrace all things not only by revolution, but by virtue, the wise divided those signs into four ternaries, according to the four elements and the foundations of all things, assigning to each ternary the beginning, middle, and end of the element suitable to it: From which the generations, states, and resolutions of all things are made: For they gave the beginning of fire to Aries, its increase or progress to Leo, and its end to Sagittarius: But the beginning of earth to Taurus, its progress to Virgo, and its end to Capricorn: The beginning of air to Gemini, its process to Libra, and its end to Aquarius: But Cancer possesses the beginning of water, Scorpio the middle, and Pisces the end. Thus the intellect comprehends the beginning, progress, and end of all things produced and to be produced from these elements, beyond which nothing is found that can be understood: because outside them there is nothing. And just as in the intellect of the divine or human craftsman all things to be made by him are conceived, so the future of all things is conceived in heaven: but it is unfolded and produced by the planets, just as by inferior powers those things which our intellect conceives are brought to effect: which especially resides in the brain, and this in a skull full of innumerable hairs: Thus that power of generation is (as the Theologians of the Hebrews say) in the sacred name of God diffused through heaven, and filling it like a skull, and a certain shell full of innumerable stars: However, their number is known to Him who numbers the multitude of stars, as also the hairs of the head, as the highest Truth says: [Marginal note: CHRIST.] All the hairs of your head are numbered. Not indeed those which are cut off and perish (says Origen), but those which were in the Nazirites filled with the Holy Spirit: so that they might cast down others: concerning whom it is said in the Canticles: [Marginal note: Origen. Canticles.] "The locks of your head are like royal purple joined to channels," those, namely, supernal ones, through which all effusions of graces flow, by cutting off which a weak man is overcome by a woman, that is, by the sensitive part, as we read of Samson: Which hairs receive influx and power from a supernal source, just like the stars. But let us return to the intellect. For it composes concepts and images, which it contains, and prayers and sentences, by which it is instructed: and all knowledge is generated, just as when the influxes of the stars are combined with the virtues of the planets and elements: whose power is contained in the heavens, especially with the intervention of a great name, or the virtue of the craftsman himself, diverse species and particular things are produced, whose names (as they say) result according to the property of the influxes and the influencing entities: Knowing these, the Protoplast (first created man) imposed names on things according to their quiddities: To which perhaps tends that saying of the highest Truth: "Your names are written in the heavens." [Marginal note: CHRIST 3.] For the Hebrews divide the twenty-two letters of their alphabet into three parts: of which three signify the three elements, seven as many planets, and twelve the twelve signs, as their characters, they assert: And they call those seven letters double, both because they are pronounced in two ways, softly and sharply: and because they represent the planets, which, according to the diversity of the signs in which they are found, remit, and P iij

--- Page 369 ---
OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

...they remit and sharpen their power: But the twelve they call 'simple', because they are always pronounced in one way, and because they represent signs: whose power always behaves in the same way: But the three they ascribe to three elements, namely fire, water, and earth. But air they consider not as an element, but as a glue of the elements. Just as, therefore, all bodies are formed from the aspects of planets and signs together with the elements, so from letters and characters signifying those parts are constituted the names of things composed from them: as is hinted at with no small mystery in the book of formation, which is ascribed to Abraham: Some assert that the spirit and soul of these composite bodies are signified by points and accents.
The first mobile carries away with the heart, or the freedom of the spirit residing there.

Cap. XXII.

[Large ornate initial E] The ninth circle, which is called the first mobile, the leader of the heavens, carrying all the heavens with it, leads them along: and it itself is led by no inferior circle, but by the sole intelligence moving it, or by God commanding it: Into which, as into the first mover, lest the whole harmony of heaven be confounded, all motion is led, as [Marginal note: Aristotle.] Aristotle proves at the end of his Organon. Thus in this our small world, the will is the mistress of all other powers, and their leader at will: To which, deservedly, kingdom and principality are due, because it always tends towards the good, as towards an object adequate to itself: even if sometimes, by error or by animal force impelling it, it chooses evil, believing or foreseeing it to be good: And then it becomes not a mistress, but a most wretched servant, as the highest [Marginal note: Christ.] Truth says: "Whoever commits sin is a slave of sin." Rightly, therefore, and tending towards the good, it is justly preferred, just as in Polities, he who has stood firm for the better and greater good is deservedly placed first. But this will, or synderesis, together with the superior part of its nature, like the first mobile, leads all inferior powers with it at will: but it itself, when upright, is led by no one, except by the highest mover, or by that influx which [Marginal notes: Theologians. Christ. David] theologians call grace, charity, or infused love. Concerning which again the highest Truth says: "No one comes to me unless my Father draws him:" And the royal prophet says that he then runs in the way of God's commandments, when his heart has been enlarged and moved by love. To its (the will's) ordered motion also follow the progresses of the other inferior powers, just as all the motions of the orbs are regulated by the revolution of the first mobile itself. Nor let anyone say that the will, as if blind, is led by the intellect: because we can love nothing unless it is first known: towards which alone the will itself is carried, as [Marginal notes: Augustine. Aristotle.] Augustine and Aristotle agree: For just as light shows the eye the way, yet by no means leads it, so the intellect demonstrates paths to the will, but does not lead the will itself along them, but the will remains mistress of its own operation. Thus also the starry heaven in a certain way represents to the first mobile the degrees and names of things to be produced by it and the planets, and for executing these, the first mobile is approached: and it willed all things by [Marginal note: The Same.] diurnal motion. Therefore, in man there is will and heart (as Aristotle says) like the first intelligence—

--- Page 370 ---
TONVS SEXTVS.                                        116

way in the sphere, the first namely, and having the likeness of the first sphere, it revolves and draws all things, just as the first mobile [draws] the other spheres. And just as sin follows in nature, when lower causes deviate from the first, and lower spheres from the first mobile: So when the law of the members and lower powers, repugnant to the mind, leads man captive into the law of sin. Therefore, every law of the members ought to yield to the dictate of the mind, just as all spheres yield to the first mover, and to that which carries them all along with its diurnal motion. And although each of the lower [spheres/powers] performs its own course, nevertheless, they are much slower in their motions than the first, most beautifully instructing us that the lower powers, even if they operate something according to what is proper to them, that work is slow or little compared to the work of a well-regulated will. But the slowest of all motions is that of the starry heaven, which moves one degree in a hundred years, as Ptolemy holds: [Marginal note: Ptolem] which is the square number of ten, which is made up of parts of the quaternary elementary number: From which it is hinted that that heaven represents the elementary body: and also because it is integrated from a fourfold kind of signs, according to the nature of the four elements, just as the body is composed of the same. Nor let anyone criticize me, that a little above we made the starry heaven correspond with the intellect, but now we equate it with the body: For the serpent sometimes holds the type of the devil, sometimes of Christ: and this, while He himself says: "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be lifted up." And any planet is sometimes equated with some element, sometimes with some order of angels. Many such things are also found compared with different things due to the symbolism that different known things have to each other: For with respect to superior minds, that heaven behaves as a body: and with respect to producing lower things, it has the likeness of an in- [Marginal note: Porph.] tellect producing ideas. So also in the coordination of things assigned by Porphyry and Aristotle, [Marginal note: Aristo.] the same thing, compared to what is superior, has the nature of a species, but compared to what is inferior, the nature of a genus. Therefore, in our proposition, the motion of the first mobile is like the motion of the soul/mind, and the motion of the starry heaven, having the likeness of bodily motion: but the revolutions of the planets represent the motions of the powers existing between the body and the soul. But if we wish to equate these things with the lowest and the highest, in the heavens, the first mobile is the most fervent of all, in the microcosm the heart and will, in the angelic [hierarchy] the burning Seraphim. Again, there is a fiery power inflaming in the Seraphim, carrying along in the first mobile, a fervent virtue in our will and heart: Therefore, this dwells in the heart, the warmest of all members, indeed, with both natural and a better heat: concerning which [Marginal note: Dauid] the Psalmist says: "My heart grew hot within me." And again: "My heart was inflamed." There is also an earthly power in the Cherubim, a most beautiful figure of ideas, in the starry heaven, a splendid picture of stars, but in the lowest element, an adornment of various herbs and flowers.

      Which are condensed and solidified with Saturn.          Cap. XXIII.
**S**entence Ptolemy's opinion is explained by his followers, that all planets are [Marginal note: Ptolem] destined to foster this man, of which four are for preserving the individual, but three for leading to work: The four are
                                                                                                P iiij

--- Page 371 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTO**

[Marginal note: The Same] The Moon, Sun, Jupiter, & Saturn: The Sun, however, as the same [author] says word for word, is the origin of vital virtue, which is in the heart: Jupiter regards the natural virtue in the liver: Saturn [regards] the receptive power: and the Moon [regards] waxing and waning vigor: But the other three are sought for morals and operations: For the imaginative power, and the penetrative [power] in doing things, must be sought from Mercury: Appetite, concupiscence, and delight, which perfect the work, [are sought] from Venus: Impulse with irascibility, and impetus, so that the work may be fortunate, [are sought] from Mars. Saturn therefore governs the receptive virtue, and among intellectual powers, memory is especially receptive, so much so that by John [Marginal note: Scotus] Scotus and his followers it is not counted among the active powers: since it is only (as they assert) a receiving virtue. For Saturn, presiding over this, makes his Saturnians well-remembering, since they have that watery power so constrained, [Marginal note: Alcabitius. Julius Firmicus] that they can long preserve received images. He also rules the ears (according to Alcabitius), receptive above all senses: but Firmicus especially attributes the right hand to him. Furthermore, hearing is more spiritual than all senses, and consequently an instrument of more secret and profound wisdom: to which Saturn leads with a peculiar virtue. He who hears (says scripture) will be wiser: or he will add, so that he may receive: as the Hebrew text has it. And this is characteristic of Saturnians, that they listen, and silently ruminating on what they have heard, they enter into more secret inner chambers: where by long and protracted consideration of many things, and by experience, they are made prudent [Marginal note: Hebrews], which is characteristic of the celestial and supramundane Saturn, whom the Hebrews call *binah* [Hebrew text: בינה], which they interpret as intelligence or prudence. Also associated with it are the spleen, stomach, bladder, and womb. And rightly is the spleen attributed to it, which (according to [Marginal note: Galen. Avicenna] Galen and Avicenna) is a vessel and receptacle of earthly and gross superfluities: which are especially governed by Saturn. Furthermore (as the same authors testify), it is porous, soft, and sponge-like: so that it may attract and receive black superfluity: and is nourished by subtle black blood: All of which are referred to Saturn himself. The stomach is also most appropriately governed by Saturn, which by its nature, with prevailing nervous parts, is cold and dry: therefore attracting humidities, like earth, Saturn, and the Moon. But it heats and digests from the inherent warmth in its flesh, fostered by the warmth of the adjacent members, namely the liver, heart, [Marginal note: The Same. Galen] spleen, gall, and hymen, as Avicenna teaches: from which aids it is rendered warmer than the liver, although it has received the opposite from nature: which (according to Galen) has placed heating agents near its belly. And just as the stomach is constrained by Saturnian power to contain food, so is the womb to contain the fetus, and both are joined together by nervous parts. If, however, the Saturnian humors, excessively increased, lead to distemperament, they produce chronic infirmities generated from gross melancholic humor and viscous phlegm, epilepsy, apoplexy, paralysis, hard apostemes which are called sclerotic, cancers, gout, phthisis, hemorrhoids of the anus and vulva, rhagades, fistulas, hidden ulcers, chronic discharges of the belly, black jaundice, elephantiasis, quartan fever, and suchlike

--- Page 372 ---
TONVS SEXTVS.                                   117

diseases, which are cured with difficulty: and they destroy the body. And if the time is at
hand, they even lead to death, agitated by the aforesaid excessive alteration. Also in the face
of man and the skin, this, when it is the disposer, imprints the signs of its complexion:
various spots, unequal eyes, a long face, an unseemly and foul aspect, varied and ugly teeth,
a diverse stature, deformed, twisted feet, wrinkled heels, also black, sparse, and coarse hairs,
joined eyebrows, a dark, greyish-blue, or leaden color: But these vary according to the
disposition of the Sun. It also leads to melancholic manners, black garments, slow operations,
solitude, sometimes those enslaved to caves and grottoes, diggers of wells and snails, makers
of lime and cement, and many such vile exercises, if he has been depressed: But well-disposed,
it elevates to all the deepest and most sublime things.

      Things which are equal with Jupiter.                    Chapter XXIV.

[Large decorative initial A]
Equal

--- Page 373 ---
**FIRST CANTO**

leading to distemperament, there arise synochal diseases, that is, continuous ones, ruptures of veins, bloody sputa, and defluxions of blood through hemorrhoids, through menses, through the nostrils, and wherever they may flow. Also hot abscesses of the liver, formed from much blood. And if the infirmity leads to death, the kinds of death are through synochal fevers, through tertian fevers, cardiac weakness (that is, debility of the body with a weakening stomach), quinsy, colic, and iliac passion, and those things which follow from this kind. However, the disposer of the body bestows a fitting figure, a moderate and beautiful stature, eyes tending towards largeness, somewhat dark, blond hair with a certain baldness, and two incisor teeth longer than the others. But with the rising sun, it renders the skin quite white and the eyes moderate; with the setting sun, however, it provides a more subdued whiteness. In character, however, it makes them honest, faithful, obedient to parents, just, lawful, and many such things which are mentioned by astrologers. But these things, however, are to the extent that that celestial virtue extends itself, either the celestial star itself disposing the body, or the presiding intelligence operating further, with the First (Cause) commanding and cooperating.

**Things that are active with Mars. Chapter XXV.**

**M**ars has its seats in the kidneys, veins, and the course of semen through the back, and in the gallbladder. But these indeed alone; with Jupiter, however (according to Firmicus), in the liver and nostrils.
[Marginal note: Iul. Fir. Auicena]
Therefore, it fittingly rages in the kidneys, since they themselves (according to Avicenna) are hot and dry; although others consider them hot and humid. But this is because the hot, humid, and radical (innate principle), informed by life-giving heat, thrives in them, but by their simple nature, they are dry and Martian. Of which thing the calculi (stones) generated in them provide a sign, because they are most active especially in Martian individuals, and with Mars favoring. And the disposer of nature combined these, just as many members of the body,
[Marginal note: Galen. Auicen.]
as Galen and Avicenna discuss. But these are given for concocting the superfluous watery and sanguineous (humors), just as the gallbladder for a receptacle of bile, and the spleen
[Marginal note: Galen.]
for a receiver of gross melancholic humor, as the same Galen determines. It is also preferred to the course of semen and the back, through which it descends, so that the semen may be warmed by its heat and receive vigor for generating offspring. Moreover, those who treat of such matters judge that the same (Mars) presides over the veins, although by their nervous, membranous, and ligamentous nature they are cold and dry, so that perhaps (notwithstanding their cold nature, which is required to constrict them) warmed by it, they may preserve the blood in its heat. And (so that we may draw a more secret reason from the storehouses of nature) we will also conclude this from their location. For they have their location between the Jovian liver and the solar heart, just as Mars is between both. For all veins, whether of the portal vein of the liver, or the mesenteric veins, into which it is divided, have their origin from the concave part of the liver, at which point,
[Marginal note: Galen.]
like the ropes of a tent to a peg (according to Galen), they are gathered, to which many wise men
[Marginal note: Aristote.]
agree. Similarly, also the vein, which is called "the greater" by Aristotle,
[Marginal note: Haliab.]
"the concave" by Galen and Hali Abbas, "the venter" by Avicenna, "the prominent" by others: because in-

--- Page 374 ---
**SIXTH SECTION.** 118

next to the gibbous and convex part of the liver it is, and in the opinion of all the aforementioned (Avicenna [Marginal note: Avicenna] excepted) it is located in the liver, and originates from the same, although physicians do not agree: But by Avicenna, as if neutral among them, it is placed between the liver and the heart: and [Marginal note: The same] all others named agree that they are continued into the liver itself: just as Mars [is connected] to Jupiter. And just as between the liver and the heart blood flows through veins carrying life, so between Jupiter and the Sun is Mars, as if a vehicle, or a fomentation of life, nourishing it with its heat and impulse. And not only from its position, but from its property and virtue, which is beyond the qualities themselves, it presides most suitably over the veins: and over the canal of sperm, being in itself suitable for these: but especially over the gallbladder, the vessel of fervent bile, which is most proper to it. But this, when excessively distempered or corrupted (especially in the aforementioned places) causes Martian infirmities, malignant pustules, carbuncles.

--- Page 375 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

UNCOVERED: For it is another blood, but changed into whiteness by decoction and heat, so says Avicenna, and with him Aristotle. Giving a sign of this, he says that in young animals the marrow is very bloody; but in those advanced in age and growing fat, it is drawn into fat.
[Marginal note: Avicenna. Aristotle.]

They also subject to the Sun, father of generation, the thighs and loins, indeed as seminal vessels: plainly not without reason did the wisest of the ancient fathers, Abraham, exact an oath from his servant upon the thighs of the Messiah, the seminal vessel, for whose pure and mysterious generation Abraham himself was solicitous, when he sent his servant, bound by an oath, to take an Aramean wife for Isaac: from whose seed the Messiah was to be generated.

Moreover, as an instrument of life, it regulates the vital spirit: also the intellect and reason: whence it wonderfully favors doctrine, true philosophy, and knowledge separated from sensible things: And it makes one, to the best of its ability, faithful, magnanimous, composed in character, aspiring to lofty things and principalities, yet illustrious through faith, and of excellent talent and virtue.

In outward appearance, however, it renders a person handsome and beautiful: and not undeservedly, since he himself corresponds to supramundane beauty, and thus is its vessel, receptacle, and instrument. It also provides varied and most beautiful eyes, especially an indication of the soul. Hence, concerning David, it is said not without mystery in the first book of Kings: that he was ruddy, with beautiful eyes, and a good appearance, for which we have, "beautiful in appearance, and of a comely face."
[Marginal note: Kings]

And it especially favors these things when it is in its rising: and if we wish to ascend higher, the Sun does this when it receives influence from the supernal East, concerning which it is said: "The just one will come from the East."
[Marginal note: Isaiah]
Moreover, it bestows a becoming stature, white in color with a certain duskiness or redness, curly and abundant hair, a round and graceful face, a becoming mouth, small lips, slender eyebrows, sweet and grave in conversation, and a graceful gait: In complexion, however, moderately warm.

If, however, the body is ill-disposed, it causes various infirmities, especially in the eyes:

--- Page 376 ---
TONVS SEXTVS. 119

Things that soften with Venus. Chapter XXVII.

[Large decorative initial V] Enus is said to preside over the mouth among the members of the head: where the kiss, a pledge of love, is given. In the body, however, she dominates the hips, the spine of the back, sperm, fat, flesh, kidneys, the vulva, or the womb with Saturn, the belly, the pubic region, and the navel, and all such things that serve the venereal act: as Astronomers teach. For the hips, which are called by Galen the sacred bone [Marginal note: Astrono. Galen.], or the broad side, so that they may be able to sustain much flesh wrapped around them, have a kind of box: into which the upper extremity of the hip (which is called a vertebra) enters, and in it turns and moves: whence it is named fourfold, looking in four directions: For in that it tends towards the wild part (according to Avicenna and Albert) [Marginal note: Auicena Albertus], it is called the ilium bone, but in Arabic al-bartapha: But when referred to the interior, it is called the femur bone, to the posterior the hip bone: and the hip socket, which is beneath the vertebra: In which region, as if within walls, are contained the bladder, the womb, the receptacle of sperm, and such things that serve Venus: and they are like storehouses of venereal things.

But why Venus pres

--- Page 377 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTO**

And in the same seat both are said to reign. But why the womb and the matrix are subjected to Venus, it was thought better to pass over in silence than to declare in speech, how nature has affected those members with such modesty, that when the corpses of men were carried supine by the waves, those of women are carried prone, so that what should be hidden may be hidden, as Pliny [Marginal note: Plinius] and Solinus [Marginal note: Solinus] report. Also to the pubic bone and the navel, as if to its proper instruments, it is preferred: [Marginal note: Iob Grego.] For the venereal power (according to Job, and Gregory his interpreter) is sensation in the navel, but in men in the loins: But if the humors existing in the same parts are imbalanced, then various ailments are induced, following venereal activity: and more easily, if those very humors overflow: For from excessive food, and drink, and excessive luxury, infirmities of this kind are generated, which, growing stronger, induce death: namely fevers, and phlegmatic diseases, and those arising from superabundant humors in the aforesaid members, in which is the concupiscible faculty, and over which (according to Ptolemy) Venus presides: [Marginal note: Ptolem.] If she is the ruler in the horoscope, she imprints these seals of her dominion: a white color with a certain darkness and redness, beautiful, numerous, and thick hair, a face...

--- Page 378 ---
**SIXTH TONE. 120**

from the brain: Avicenna, however, Averroes, Albertus, and the Conciliator seem to favor Aristotle: [Marginal note: Avicen. Averroes Albert. Concilia.]
But those who are truly wise say that they (the aforementioned authors) agree that the nerves themselves have their immediate origin from the heart, from which also the brain (comes): but to be formed and divided by the brain itself. From the heart again (as Albert says) they have hardness, but softness from the brain, from [Marginal note: Albertus.]
which they are divided. Thus also Mercury, whose power thrives in the nerves, has its power from the Sun, which is the heart of the mundane body: and as its son, it always follows the same father obediently, so much so that it is distant from him by either no or few degrees: And it is contiguous to the Moon, which has an affinity with the brain: whence it receives power from both. In the brain also it has power with its ventricles, veins, and arteries. Finally, it is preferred to the legs and feet, as co-helpers of the hands, so faithful indeed that when one fails, the other supplies: For some have been seen, whose hands failed, they were able to write with their feet, and perform many such offices of the hands. If, however, its power prevails in a person, it makes them of moderate and slender stature, of a whitish color, with black and beautiful hair, beard, and eyes, an elevated forehead, a long face, even nostrils, joined eyebrows, small teeth, slender and long fingers, quite handsome in figure, especially if supported by the rising Sun: but with the setting Sun, it makes the color somewhat blackish mixed with saffron, the body emaciated, and the complexion dry. But in a badly disposed subject, it induces madness, defect of memory, disturbing diseases, various causeless fears, sluggishness in the limbs and nerves, and stuttering: also phrenitis, apoplexy, epilepsy, colic, and diseases following raging humors, spitting of blood, the cause of which is not apparent: and hidden ailments. If, however, infirmities arise from an extrinsic cause, that is, reading, writing, reasoning, measuring, excessive cogitation about poetry, and things of this kind. And because it is too effective in working, and swift, in a short space it leads its Mercurial (subject) to the end of life: so that in it that saying of sacred eloquence may have its place: "Being made perfect in a short space, he fulfilled a long time." [Marginal note: Wisdom]

**Things moved by the Moon. Chapter XXIX.**

[Decorative initial T]hough the Moon disposes the whole body and individual members according to the variety of signs and aspects with the Sun and other planets, it is nevertheless said to have the greatest power in moving certain members that respond to it with a peculiar affinity: For it presides over the left eye, just as the Sun presides over the right: so that the two luminaries in each world may mutually agree. Frequently also it predominates over all humors, which in both worlds, and also in trees and living beings, ascend and descend following the Moon itself: Which is quite evidently proven in the fluxes of women: which are therefore called menstrual, because they follow the course of the Moon: which is completed almost monthly. In other humors also it is likewise manifest to those who observe well, since they are more prone (to flow) when the Moon is in a watery sign, than when in a fiery or earthy one. And therefore, experts in this kind of business order these things to be observed when giving medicines. It is also judged to be preferred to the lung, which like a fan cools the heart and those things that are inflamed by the heart itself, and

--- Page 379 ---
**CANTICI PRIMI**

...it tempers, just as the Moon tempers those things that boil over with the most ardent vigor of the Sun: And just as
[Marginal note: Galen. Averroes] the heart (as Galen and Averroes testify) nourishes the lung, providing it with digested and pleasant heat: so the Sun, by its heating virtue, is the Moon's own nursling. Moreover, it presides over the marrow of the spine, and over purgings that flow through the strainers of the nose, mouth, and such: also over superfluous nails, hairs, and similar things: but at the same time
with Venus, it presides over fat. In external features, however, it imprints these signs of its disposition: a blue and whitish color, goat-like and greyish-blue eyes, a swift and varied movement, a moderate and slender stature, in most cases: In character, however, easily changeable, unless supported by some good irradiation: and in
executing what it has thought, prompt, swift, and generally quite benevolent: Moreover, various
dispositions according to the variety of the sign in which it is received, and of the concurring aspects, and of the light by which it is now held semi-full. But to a poorly disposed subject, it induces infirmities arising from those superfluities. Moreover, it harms all members agitated by iron, or by any other means, according to the sign's correspondence with those members: But
most especially the brain, over which it more effectively predominates: whence those harmed in it (even in sacred scripture) are called lunatics, and sufferers of demonic diseases: For in such lunar individuals, and in women, a broad faculty seems to be granted to demons for agitating them. But if this be true, and whence it comes, and how any planet, and sign, or superior virtue (as we have touched upon) dominates any member, a deeper inquiry would here be sought,
[Marginal note: Paul] perhaps not to be committed to writing, as the Apostle says: 'We speak wisdom among the perfect:' who, namely, can be capable of divine and supreme providence: Which, even if it rules and disposes all things, nevertheless distributes the care of execution to various ministers, both beneficial and harmful: as this great Republic of the world requires.
[Marginal note: David] Concerning beneficial ministers, the Prophet sings: 'The angel of the Lord encamps around those who fear him, and delivers them:' But concerning harmful ones, 'Emissions through evil angels.'
[Marginal note: John in,] John agrees, who in the Apocalypse mentions both favoring and harming angels. From many other places of sacred scripture, we can also be taught about both. And what the supreme Provider does through angels, as through ministers, the same He does (as we have said elsewhere) through the heavens, as through instruments: so that all things may cooperate in the ministry of God: Which antiquity, even partly sensing, feigned various deities
[Marginal note: Virgil Numa Pompilius Livy] presiding over human members: Some dedicated the ear to Memory, but Virgil mentions it dedicated to Phoebus, saying: 'Cynthius plucked my ear, and admonished me.' But Numa Pompilius consecrated the right hand, the seat of fortitude and that by which an oath is made, to Fides (Faith), as Livy narrates. They placed the fingers under the protection of Minerva: They dedicated the knees to Mercy: hence they bend them, imploring pardon and mercy. But the navel,
which we have subjected to Venus as the seat of luxury, they say was consecrated to Jupiter: whence the effigy of the navel was celebrated in the temple of Jupiter Ammon: because they believed all members referred to the navel itself, as to a center: just as all worldly members are led to the center of that sphere whose circumference is nowhere, but the center itself is everywhere:
[Marginal note: Hermes] as Hermes taught. And the ancients pursue many such things.

--- Page 380 ---
TONVS SEXTVS. 121

indicating that all things, even the smallest members, are ruled by higher powers. If this is rightly understood, and the true presiding powers are known, it will not be alien from due piety, since the sacred scriptures also testify that our members are governed by heavenly virtues. And to begin from the lowest parts, the Prophet says concerning the feet: "And He set my feet upon a rock, and directed my steps." [David] Also concerning the hands, he says: "Blessed be the Lord my God, who trains my hands for battle, and my fingers for war." [Psalm.] And concerning the mouth, he says: "He put a new song in my mouth, a hymn to our God." With which (is) that of the Savior: "I will give you a mouth and wisdom." [David Christ] But He cares for the hairs of the head so much that He says: "A hair from your head shall not perish." Thus, therefore, all members of both worlds are proven to be ruled by higher powers; concerning which, at least in part (God willing), we will discuss in its proper place.

That from the proportion of the motions of the planets to one another, and with the eighth heaven, the proportion of our powers is indicated. Chapter XXX.

Saturn completes its motion in thirty years; Jupiter in twelve; from which results a proportion of the velocity of motions of two and a half. But that of Jupiter to Mars, which completes its course in two years, is one and a half times. But that of Mars

--- Page 381 ---
OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

After all these is the Moon, making all things clear, and this agrees with the practical intellect, which directs every work, like a helmsman in a ship while it crosses the sea: But the proportion of the Moon and the planets to the zodiacal heaven is according to the speed of their motion: Which proportion is followed by that which is of the practical intellect to all powers, both intellectual and animal: and that which is of these to each other, and of all of them to the body, which does not move, except insofar as it is led by superior powers, like the eighth heaven: to which, by virtue of its threefold-fourfold nature, is compared the four-elemental body, which, beyond the diurnal motion by which it is led by the Prime Mover, does not have its own motion, neither of trepidation nor any other, as some assert: and that motion which it seems to have, they suppose to be from the variation of the Sun: whose motion is in a certain way a rule and a standard for others. For this (the Sun) crosses the Zodiac in every year, and beyond: lest for six hours, which in every four

--- Page 382 ---
**SIXTH TONE. 122**

**On the admirable harmony of disordered things, and of both worlds within themselves. Chapter XXXI.**

[Large initial E containing a woodcut illustration of a figure] And before we ascend to the harmony of man with the supercelestial world, we will also survey the agreement which the dregs of both this corporeal world and the lower one, and the infernal parts, possess. For in this sensible world there is an earthly dwelling, there is a celestial house, and finally, there is a lofty and supercelestial one, where the supreme Moderator resides: But beyond all these are purgative places, where the dregs of both this domestic and the celestial world flow together, as something superfluous, and the refuse of the food of the supreme life, which is nourished by angelic minds and human souls: as He Himself testifies in the Gospel, which is titled according to John, saying: [CHRIST] "My food is to do the will of my Father, who is in heaven." And what this will is, declaring elsewhere, He says: "I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of Him who sent me: For this is the will of Him who sent me, [The Same] that I should lose nothing of all that He has given me, but should raise it up on the last day." Therefore, the soul and the angelic mind are the food of God and Christ, who eats and receives all of them: so that by purifying and cooking them with His warming and divine power in the depths of His mercy, with which the dawn from on high has visited us, He may make them worthy of God. Therefore, digesting this food which He has taken, He transforms that part of the better substance into Himself as nourishment, not of necessity, but of pleasure. "We are transformed (says Paul) [Paul] into the same image, so that we also may be called and be children of God (as John says)." [John] Nor does He only receive human souls as food, but also angelic minds, so that He may purify them, and as the mediator of all, unite them to God, as we can learn from Dionysius and Grosseteste: [Diony. Lyncon.] For the former says: "angels are purged from pride and ignorance:" And the latter interpreting says: "For those first substances, divine knowledge, which is the Word and the Son of God, is as it were a cleanser, not from filth which was inherent, which among us is usually called true purgation: but lest there be any hindrance, which kind of purgation is, according to truth, the best and most sufficient." Therefore, the superfluous parts of the final digestion have been sent down, and are sent down, to the foul and dreggy places of hell: Where, falling without any order, enveloped in that most confused mass and most horrible chaos of darkness, they pay the due penalties for their insolence, by which they were unwilling to feed Him, who complaining threatens, saying: [CHRIST] "I was hungry, and you gave me no food to eat: Therefore, cursed by me and cast out, go into eternal fire, to which you have been given as perpetual food, after you were unwilling to be food for me and my members, just as I offered myself as food for you, so that you might live in me." These, therefore, are cast out as dead and stinking corpses, according to the prophecy of Isaiah: "Their corpses (he says) [Isaias] have become like dung in the midst of the streets of hell:" The same thing happened previously concerning angelic minds: which not only were unwilling to be a feast for the supreme Truth and Mediator, but presumed to devour Him themselves, as John says in that most famous vision: "And the dragon stood..." [Apocal]
**Q ij**

--- Page 383 ---
CANTICLE THE FIRST

before the woman, who was about to give birth, so that when she had given birth, he might devour her son:
Whence a great battle arose in heaven, Michael and his angels fought
with the dragon: and the dragon fought, and his angels: and they did not prevail,
nor was their place found any longer in heaven: And that great dragon was cast out,
that ancient serpent, who is the Devil, and Satan. Therefore he was cast out with his
followers, like refuse and dregs into the sewer of hell: to which many
mortals are daily sent down, and they themselves, made dregs for their own evil purpose:
Whether this agrees with this human world, is clear enough to one observing its dis-
position: For in it indeed is the supreme citadel of the brain, where the superior portion of reason,
nay, the divine portion, resides, governing all lower things. There is also a heavenly dwelling,
the anterior part of the head, where obedient virtues, namely the imaginative,
the cogitative, and the like, inhabit, like handmaidens of heaven and the superior king,
executing what the Lord has commanded. There are also lower attendants, namely the
sensitive virtues inhabiting the lower and sensible house, which rightly ought to serve the su-
perior ministers, but especially the prince, as the supreme Emperor commanded, saying:
"Your appetite will be subject to you." There is also the lowest place of the base, beneath which
the feet are merely subjected like columns: where is the purgative house, and the lower door
of this human ark: from which superfluous, dreggy, and sordid things are perpetually emitted,
to be neglected. Thus also those spirits, nay souls, made vile women, who, having abandoned
the first gold, saffron, and celestial delights, by which they ought to have been nourished,
embraced (says Jeremiah) dung, that is [Marginal note: Jer.] the pleasures of lower things, and they themselves became
beasts of burden and dung: concerning whom another prophet says: "The beasts of burden have rotted in their dung."
Concerning whose [Marginal note: Joel.] confusion and corresponding disorder, we have touched upon these few things, lest any part
of this mundane and human house be left untouched.

That Man Harmonizes with Angels, Containing Them. Chapter XXXII.

[Decorative initial H] Man is (says the wise man) to whom is given the power of containing all things:
Therefore, beyond lower and middle things, namely mutable and celestial,
he also apprehends angels and God Himself: so that he is in a way the bond of all things,
and nearest to all, and a true world containing all things, and conversing with all:
with the higher indeed through faith and wisdom, with the middle through reason and discourse:
with the lower through sense and dominion: And let him have a symbol with all things,
with matter in its proper subject, with the elements in a fourfold body, with plants in vegetative
power, with the heavens in the influx of superior parts to inferior ones, and in circular motion
tending to the same from which it came: with angels in mind and wisdom: with God in the
containment of all things, which man has by composition, but God by a certain sim-
[Marginal note: Mercu.] plicity. Hence Mercury says: "Man is even superior to the heavenly inhabitants,"

--- Page 384 ---
**VOLUME SIX.** **123**

or at least enjoys an equal lot: For whoever of the heavenly beings descends to earth, abandons the threshold of heaven: but man ascends into heaven, and measures it: Nor do those things which are lowest, and those which are highest, and all other things, escape him: and what is greater, not leaving the earth, he is raised into heaven: so vast is human power.

Wherefore it must be dared to say that man is indeed a mortal earthly God, but God is an immortal heavenly man: Hence by the virtue of these, individual things are governed: yet all things are subjected to one. Therefore, that angels exist, not only do the sacred scriptures teach, but also natural philosophers assert and prove it, [Marginal note: philoso.] especially Plato with all his Academics, Chrysippus, and Aristotle: The latter [Marginal note: Plato Academ. Chrysi. Aristo. Chry.] indeed says, it would be absurd for that part which is most apt for generating animals, such as the stars and ethereal regions, to be deprived of its fullness: Hence he judged that generations were necessary there, and that these were intelligences. Chrysippus, however, asserted that perfection is found in each thing: For a puppy is imperfect, but a dog is perfect in its kind: Thus a foal becomes a perfect horse, and a boy a man. In the same series, it also happens in parts, since the hand is more perfect than the foot, and the eye than the hand: Hence, since the parts of the lower world are imperfect, because the earth only generates: beasts thrive with sense and motion: man is governed by reason, and drawn by appetite to lower things. There is therefore reason unimpeded by the senses, and this must be in angels. Hence Plato asserted that between Gods and men there were certain divine powers, intermediate by nature and place, and that these governed all divinations, miracles, and individual men: And if by the gentiles they are named genii, by us however they are named angels. But how they relate to us by influencing and interacting, from which a most sweet harmony results in operation, because these things escape the sight of the eyes and other senses, it is not easy to discuss them, therefore we ought to consult not Zeno, Cleanthes, Chrysippus, or Ari- [Marginal note: Zeno. Clean. Chryf. Aristote. Diony.] stotle, but our prophets and pontiffs, Dionysius, and other fathers illuminated by divine light in this matter: but especially that greatest pontiff, who says: All things whatsoever I have heard from my Father, I have made known to you: For he says: Their angels, that is, of the little ones, always see the face of my Father: from whom they draw: that they may influence us, so that, joined like leaven with our mass, yet by the power of the supreme craftsman, they do not indeed corrupt, but transform us into a divine lot: Hence, according to that prophetic [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] saying: With the holy you will be holy, it can also be said to us, with an angel you will be an angel. Therefore, when man receives their influx and vigor, he is called Seraphic, Cherubic, angelic, and the like, according to the nature of the influx received. Thus man has a conformity with all of them, and from all he receives (according to the writings [Marginal note: Diony.] of Dionysius) purifications, illuminations, and advancements. But descending to particulars, man receives from angels, that he may be a good messenger of God, and an interpreter of the divine mind: From archangels, that he may rule over all to whom it is given to preside: From principalities, that also the powers of all subjects

Q iij

--- Page 385 ---
CANTICLE ONE

...embracing all to itself by a certain most hidden and supercelestial force, it may attract: From Virtues, it receives strength, by which it may be strengthened against the enemies of truth, and the arm for which we fight: From Powers, protection against the enemies of this earthly home: From Dominations, help, by which we may subdue the domestic enemy, whom we always carry with us: And that we may attain the proper end, we receive from Thrones, whence we may be joined together; and whence, gathered within ourselves, we may fix our memory on those eternal spectacles: From Cherubim, the light of the mind, or super-excellent images and figures, by which we may contemplate them: From Seraphim, moreover, that we may finally adhere to them with perfect love. And unless man had a symbol and communication with angels, he could not be transformed into an angel, as we have already declared above to have happened.

Man is attuned with God, existing as His temple and image. Chapter XXXIII.

It was given enough, and more than enough, to man, that he himself, having become another world, should embrace all parts of that world within himself; yet this seemed little to the most munificent Giver, unless He also offered Himself to man, as to a beloved son. Which I would by no means dare to assert, unless the wise, and the Giver of all good things Himself, testified to the same. [Marginal note: Xistus.] Xistus [Marginal note: Pythag.] the Pythagorean judged the soul of man to be the temple of God, and therefore immortal, like a sacred host, [Marginal note: Paulus] so that the place might be proportionate to what is placed there: But Paul proclaims this with an clear voice, saying: "You are the temple of God." Which could be proven in many places of sacred scripture: But let us first consider how man is the image of God, made in the likeness of God and with His similitude, as the Creator Himself reserved before He brought him forth: For he is the image and likeness of God, containing all things that are in God: And in this the image differs from the trace, because the latter represents a part, while the former represents the whole (as our theologians teach). Hence, those who have dealt with this image have tried to investigate all things that man can represent in God: For all commonplace thinkers, striving to adapt the three powers of man to the three persons, have said that in memory the Father, who is called fertile memory; in intellect the Son, the Word and wisdom of God; and in will the Holy Spirit, indeed divine love, is revealed. But more acute theologians, progressing further, teach that also in operations (which they call secondary acts) those divine properties or actions are represented: or (as they say) notional and essential [attributes], or by whatever other name divine things can be called: For we do not know, nor is it permitted to those who know to speak of those secrets of God, removed from all modes of creatures; and who is (says [Marginal note: Diony.] Dionysius) all things eminently: so much so that these words which we use cannot express those things which are in Him, except through a certain similitude and analogy: according to which, progressing further, we will say that also in our passions we represent something in God, which, although they are not passions in God, yet analogically we call them by the name of passions: such as anger, wrath, and desire...

--- Page 386 ---
TONE SIX. 124

scence. And hence concerning the first, the Prophet says: Lord, do not rebuke me in your fury, [Marginal note: David]
nor chasten me in your anger: And again: When his anger shall quickly burn: And who
knows the power of your anger? There are almost infinite places of sacred scripture testifying to the anger,
fury, and indignation of God. Also concerning complacency, which comes from the desiring
virtue, the Father's voice thundered, saying: This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased: and concerning the complacency He has with us, in the volume [Marginal note: Prov.]
of Proverbs it says: I was delighted every day playing before Him at all times,
playing in the circle of the earth, and my delights were with the sons of men. John also [Marginal note: John]
says: For God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son. Sacred
writings are full both of God's love for the good, and of His indignation towards the stubborn
and rebellious. But omitting these things, let us descend to the particular members of God, supported
by the testimonies of sacred scripture, together with Dionysius, [Marginal note: Dionys.]
according to which we bear a more express image of God: For he himself, from many places of scripture,
proves human members attributed to God, (such as) head, eyes, nostrils, mouth, tongue, hands,
feet,

--- Page 387 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Contemplating, loving, and remembering the reason for the image made by God, we awaken it within ourselves: But by contemplating God Himself, and pursuing with love that same image, which is the Son of God Himself, we are transformed: For love (according to
[Marginal note: Diony.] Dionysius) is a virtue transforming the lover into the beloved: If we moderate this love and concupiscible virtue, and exercise wrath and indignation, restrained by reason, against the enemies of the prince, we still bear the image of Him,
[Marginal note: Psalmo-graphus. Ioan.] of whom, when He was indignant against the profaners of the temple, the prophet says (as John interprets), "The zeal of your house has consumed me": Of whom again, with love kindled, it is said in the Apocalypse: "He loved us, and washed us in His blood." Nor are we conformed only to the Son, but also, bearing the image of the Father and of the whole Trinity, we can be conformed to them:
[Marginal note: Moses. Trism.] For God had said (as Moses narrates), "Let us make man in our image and likeness": Trismegistus, echoing this doctrine, expresses the Trinity, whose image we bear, not under the names of persons, but with other terms, saying: "But the Father of all, existing as intellect, life, and splendor, created man similar to Himself: to whom He rejoiced as a son: for he was beautiful: and bore the image of his father:" This Father is intellect,
[Marginal note: Theol.] having (as theologians say) essence as its object: The Son is life, as He Himself teaches, when He says: "I am the life": The Holy Spirit is splendor, indeed, He is fire itself, shining and inflaming: To all these we are conformed by right understanding, right life, and right love: And they are conformed to Him in certain particulars, which Scripture is accustomed to call by the names of members through analogy, concerning which let us see in detail.

**On the harmony of the members of God and man. Chapter XXXIIII.**
[Decorative initial V] What then are the members in God, to which man can be conformed, we shall survey by sketching rather than by painting, bringing forth from many things some which sacred scripture attests concerning this matter:
[Marginal note: Antiqui] and the ancients described them in the type of a super-exalted tree: For all, both rational creatures, and the Redeemer, and God Himself, are called trees,
[Marginal note: Moses.] as Moses hints in his garden of delight, which he describes as planted and filled with diverse trees, that is, with many kinds of ranks and conditions of rational creatures: But in the middle, the tree of lives is said to be placed, from which all life, both angelic and human, and whatever other life there may be, emanates and flows: and in which all things live, and lived before they were unfolded into their proper forms, as John says: "What was made, in Him was life." There also is said to have been the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, which (unless I am mistaken) is Christ man, who alone simultaneously and once tasted the good of blessedness and the evil of our passions.
[Marginal note: Theolo.] For (as all theologians exclaim) there was no one else who was simultaneously blessed and a wayfarer, except Christ Jesus: Whose rank was forbidden to Adam, all others being granted. Therefore, man is a tree, Christ is a tree, and God Himself is a tree, who is described in the type of a tree, by that sacrament, so that all the members of man may be con

--- Page 388 ---
TONVS SEXTVS. 125

may come/correspond: For its summit (which they call a crown) is the head, upon which the crown itself is placed.
But on either side of the head is an eye: With the right, indeed, He most kindly beholds those to be rewarded, and with the left, He more sharply regards those to be punished. Concerning these eyes, scripture says: "The eyes of the Lord contemplate the good and the evil." But I think that should by no means be overlooked, that עין, that is, 'ayin' in Hebrew, signifies both a fountain and an eye: so that the eye and the fountain of divine piety are the same, just as the eye and the fountain of piety are the same in us. If this [eye/fountain] is opened to shed tears for the love of God, and [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] for the sorrow of Christ suffering, and of the afflicted neighbor, immediately the fountain of divine piety is opened to compassion for the one weeping. Therefore, the Savior not without reason said: "Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted," namely, by the superabundance of divine piety received from that fountain, concerning which it is said: "For with You is the fountain of life." There are also [Marginal note: Psalm.] ears there, concerning which it is also sung in the psalms: "And His ears are open to their prayers." For they are moved by our prayers, when we also open our ears to hear what the Lord God speaks within us, and when we hear the prayers and cries of a neighbor in need of our help. But if our head (that supreme portion residing in the citadel, namely) is moved towards a divine object, or some good, then the most excellent head of all, and God, the giver of all good things, is also moved, drawing and leading, according to that saying of the Savior: "No one comes to Me unless My Father [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] draws him." For sometimes God goes before, as the Prophet says: "His mercy [Marginal note: Dauid Ioël.] will go before me." But sometimes God Himself seeks that we first be moved, [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] as it is written: "Return to Me, and I will return to you." Then He also is moved, who was made the head of the body of the church, as He Himself testifies to all, saying: "Come to Me, all you who labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you by kindly coming to you and making My dwelling with you." Beneath the eyes and head are both arms, and the right and left hands. The former, indeed, imparts mercy and all good things; the latter, however, punishes the ill-deserving with a most severe law, which proceeds from it. For from there comes the law and harsh justice; and from the right comes the law of mercy and grace through the Son of God, who is not without reason always said to be placed at the right hand of the Father. Hence, by a great mystery, the wicked, who are to receive Christ's harsh sentence, are said to be placed at the judge's left; while those who are to obtain mercy are placed at the right. Therefore, the left arm had been revealed to the fathers in the harsher law; but the right arm has been opened to us through the Son of God, concerning whom Isaiah, wishing to prophesy, cried out: "Lord, who will believe our report, and to whom has the arm of the Lord [Marginal note: Isaias] been revealed?" or "through whom has it been revealed?", as the Hebrew truth has it: Certainly through Him, or above Him, who ascended like a shoot from a thirsty land, namely, the Jewish people then made dry by their sins. So He came without outward appearance and the pomp of royal display, yet full of treasures of wisdom and mercy, which are placed at the right hand. Therefore, He poured out wisdom, clemency, and mercy upon His disciples and the people entrusted to Him, distributing all that was His—body, blood, and soul—considering it more blessed to give than to receive, all
Q v

--- Page 389 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

[Marginal note: CHRIST. David]
and protesting, and crying out: Give, and it will be given to you: Move your hand
towards your neighbor, and you will feel God's right hand most generously opened to you. In the
middle, however, as the heart, and the whole belly, is the truly beautiful Socratic, indeed di-
vine, from which all things are beautiful: concerning which the psalmist says: Strength and beauty
are in His sanctuary: for which we have: Praise and beauty in His sanctifi-
cation: For that word תפארת Tipheret, which is translated as magnificen-
ce, rather signifies that true beauty, by which all things become beautiful with divine life and
beauty. To this corresponds the most beautiful, and more excellent than all other mem-
bers, the heart, greatly desired by God Himself: By which, moved into the love of God, the di-
[Marginal note: Canticles.] vine heart is also moved into the love of the one who loves, as it is said in the Canticles: My beloved
is mine, and I am his; he shall dwell between my breasts: For these breasts, placed
[Marginal note: Solomon] under the arms, Solomon desired to suckle, saying: Let him kiss me with the kiss
of his mouth, for your breasts are better than wine, for they offer the sweetest milk, which
constitutes prophets, and friends of God, and those wise in divine things. And because this
offering was made especially in the land of promise (which is commonly called the holy land,
[Marginal note: Daniel.] but by Daniel the land of *zebi*, that is, pre-eminent and pleasant, since in it are diffused
all charisms, and all legal and prophetic doctrines), therefore it was called
a land flowing with milk and honey, that is, wisdom and a taste for divine things: Whence
it is not surprising: if one eating butter, made from that milk, knows how to reject evil
[Marginal note: Isaiah] (as Isaiah says) and choose good: because the spiritual man judges all things. These, there-
fore, are the breasts that suckled all the prophets, which by another name are called the third heaven,
[Marginal note: Paul] to which Paul, ascending, saw the secret things of God, which it is not lawful for a man to speak. Under
the heart, however, are all the intestines, and certain instruments, as the founda-
tions of all life and generation: Whence in the archetype this intestine is called the foun-
dation, tree, and trunk of all lives: From which place the most abundant influxes
of heavenly life descend into us: provided that we care to live for God, and to devote ourselves to life
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] itself, as the author of life says: My sheep hear my voice, and I know them,
and they follow me, and I give them eternal life. The last part, however, in the arche-
type, represents the feet, by which He inhabits the earth, which is called the foot-
stool of His feet: whence it is also called in Hebrew *Sachina*, that is, a dwelling in
us: It is also called the land of the living, and a kingdom, in which, namely, He immediately
[Marginal note: The Same.] reigns in us: And this divinity communicated to mortals the greatest teacher calls the king-
dom of heaven, when he says: The Kingdom of God is within you. But whoever desires this, let him
do violence to himself, since only the violent seize it, especially from the days of John
the Baptist, who was the end of the Mosaic law, with Christ initiating the Evangelical law,
in which not the mortification of animals, but a complete mortification of oneself is required, and
perfect violence in subduing the animal man.

--- Page 390 ---
TONE SEVEN. 126

[Decorative initial V containing a figure, possibly a creator or musician, amidst celestial or geometric elements] So that in harmony all things, even particulars existing in this corrupt world, may agree with the archetype. The Seventh Tone.
By reasons and authorities it is proven that all things have something in the archetype to which they correspond. Chap. I.
To what majesty prime matter sings in harmony. Chap. II.
With what the earth is established. Chap. III.
With what other elements resonate in the same. Chap. IIII.
What stones signify therein. Chap. V.
What seat metals have there. Chap. VI.
What place plants hold there. Chap. VII.
With what this plain of ours is equated. Chap. VIII.
By what mountains are raised. Chap. IX.
What the desert and dry land. Chap. X.
What the fruitful earth. Chap. XI.
What the sea and waters. Chap. XII.
What springs. Chap. XIII.
What rivers and canals. Chap. XIIII.
What fishponds, lakes, and pools. Chap. XV.
What the Red Sea. Chap. XVI.
What clouds and rain. Chap. XVII.
What dew and hoarfrost. Chap. XVIII.
What hail, snow, and hoarfrost. Chap. XIX.
What ice and crystal. Chap. XX.
What the paradise of delight. Chap. XXI.
What Gihon, Pishon, Tigris, and Euphrates flowing from paradise itself. Chap. XXII.
What the Jordan, and the river Nile of Egypt. Chap. XXIII.
What wine, milk, butter, and honey. Chap. XXIIII.
What the land flowing with milk and honey. Chap. XXV.
What oil. Chap. XXVI.
What the palm, cedar, shittim wood, and hyssop, and willow. Chap. XXVII.
What the vine and vineyard. Chap. XXVIII.
What animals of holiness. Chap. XXIX.
What wild goats, stags, and fawns. Chap. XXX.
What sheep, and shepherds of sheep. Chap. XXXI.
What animals, fish, birds, and plants clean and unclean. Chap. XXXII.
What Jerusalem, Zion, and the temple. Chap. XXXIII.
What Egypt, Babylon, and Damascus. Chap. XXXIIII.
What Arabia, Mount Sinai, and Mesopotamia of Syria. Chap. XXXV.

--- Page 391 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**
**IT IS PROVEN BY REASONS AND AUTHORITIES THAT**
**ALL THINGS HAVE SOMETHING IN THE ARCHETYPE**
**to which they correspond. Chapter One.**

[Large decorative initial S] The most proven and no less common dogma of the wise is that all created things pre-exist prudently in the artisan, and not by chance, the artisan creating: In the same way, a house in an architect; so also a speech pre-exists in an orator; nor otherwise offspring in the begetter and pregnant one: So this machine of the universe in the supreme progenitor God, as a creative life, presided, to whose measure it would form all members. For number, weight, and measure, by which all things are numbered, established, and measured (as Augustine most wisely teaches), are not in the things produced, just as neither the measure by which cloth is measured, nor the weight by which heavier things are weighed, nor the number by which all things are numbered, is found in the things measured, established, or numbered, but undoubtedly outside them. Therefore, number, weight, and measure, by which all things are measured and weighed, are necessarily outside all those things. And since there is nothing outside all produced things except God himself, it remains that in Him are number, weight, and measures.
[Marginal note: Prisci. / Theolo. / Abrahã] Therefore, the Ancient Theologians most excellently and elegantly celebrated that most ancient dogma, first (as it is said) revealed by the patriarch Abraham, by which we are taught that measures and enumerations are in the archetype, by which all things are arranged and numbered.
[Marginal note: August.] And concerning these things, Augustine most excellently continues, saying: In God are numbers without number, since all things that are in Him are God himself, the unique one. And there is weight without weight, by which the Creator himself is not burdened, but established, allowing all other things to be moved and finally established. So also our soul is a certain number
[Marginal note: Academ.] and rational measure, called so by the Academics, by which we measure all things to be understood and done by us, so that we may be able to avoid error, foolishness, and deformity in our works. Nor indeed would this harmonious fabric of the world, balanced by due weights, subsist unless numbered and weighed by its Creator and Governor. So neither would a house or a Republic enjoy its peace and tranquility, unless it were governed by him who rules it: Whose measure and balance is in the governor, to whose standard all things entrusted to him are arranged. Necessarily, therefore, in blessed God are understood measures and enumerations, by which He measures and numbers all things,
[Marginal note: Ecclesia. / Dauid / CHRI / STVS.] as it is read in Ecclesiasticus: "Who has numbered the sand of the sea, the drops of rain, and the days of the world?" "Who has measured the height of the sea, and the depth of the abyss?" unless, of course, that creative and governing wisdom, concerning which it is also sung in the psalm: "Who numbers the multitude of the stars, and calls them all by their names." But also, "He numbers all the hairs of the head," as it is said in the Gospel.
[Marginal note: Ezechie. / Ioan.] But by what measure the Creator measured this worldly house, we are seriously taught by Ezekiel and John, of whom one with a reed of six cubits and a palm, the other as

--- Page 392 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 127**

Indeed, he reports that he saw the city measured with a golden reed, or this worldly house, as we will discuss more broadly in its place. To Belshazzar also it was said through Daniel: God has numbered your kingdom, and finished it: so that it is also hinted that the course of life is numbered, beyond which we cannot transgress, just as Job speaks with open mouth, saying: [Marginal note: Job] The days of man are short, and the number of his months is with you: you have appointed his bounds, which cannot be passed, though they may be shortened. Also, the merits and misdeeds of all are numbered, so that they may be rewarded and punished in due proportion by Him who speaks through Zechariah, saying: [Marginal note: Zach.] I will measure Jerusalem, that is, the soul (as it is explained in a moral sense), and I will see how great is its length and its breadth. Which Christ states more clearly, saying: [Marginal note: CHRIST.] With what measure you have measured, it will be measured to you again. And through another Evangelist he says: [Marginal note: Luke.] Give, and it will be given to you: A good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and overflowing, will be given into your bosom, for with the same measure that you have measured, it will be measured to you again. But the misdeeds of men are said to be weighed with a double measure, namely, a greater and a lesser. The greater is compared to mountains, when it is said: Your justice is like the mountains of God: [Marginal note: David] Which by the Hebrews is called Din, which signifies a hard and strong judgment, so that no one can be justified by it, as the Prophet says: Enter not into judgment with your servant, O Lord, for no living person will be justified in your sight. And in Isaiah [Marginal note: Isaiah] it is said: We have all become unclean, and all our righteousness is like a menstruous cloth. With which Gregory agrees: [Marginal note: Greg.] "All human justice," he says, "is proven to be injustice, if it is strictly judged." But concerning the lesser justice, the prophet Micah [Marginal note: Mich.] says: Is there yet fire in the house of the wicked, and treasures of iniquity, a lesser measure full of wrath?

Also, the charisms granted to us are called a measure, and faith given, as the Apostle says to the Romans: [Marginal note: Paul] As God has distributed to each a measure of faith. And again to the Ephesians: [Marginal note: The Same] To each one of us grace has been given according to the measure of the gift of Christ. He also declares there that we will have a perfect and determined measure of the body to be resumed in a happy and blessed state, when he says: We shall all come to the unity of faith and the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Also, the spiritual body and its members are measured, [Marginal note: Ibid.] as he added a little later, saying: Speaking the truth in love, we are to grow up in every way into him who is the head, Christ, from whom the whole body, joined and knit together by every joint with which it is supplied, according to the working in the measure of each member. From these and many other passages of sacred scripture, it is proven that measures and weights exist in the archetype, by which all lower things were measured when they were created, so that each one might stand harmonious in its own degrees, and now also they are weighed and pondered, so much so that there is nothing in creation, or that is done, which does not correspond to and is not examined by those eternal measures, and each thing exists and acts only as much as has been granted by those supernal measures, and they receive for deeds well or ill done only as much as has been decreed by those measures to be fitting. But let us descend to the correspondence of particular things.

--- Page 393 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

To whose majesty prime matter responds harmoniously. Chapter II.

[Decorative initial O inside a square frame depicting a landscape with a building] To God the highest, who makes all things and is the first act, so that omnipotent matter and the first receptive potency may respond, it is fitting that between those two extremes all intermediates should result, from Him who is omnipotent in leading all things, and from that which is most disposed to receive all things. Concerning their agreement, Eusebius Pamphilus discourses elegantly in his work on the Triad and Monad. "To the first being," he says, "matter is always opposed: for the former alone acts, the latter alone suffers; the former alone moves, the latter alone is moved:" Which, as the receiver of all species, some physicists have called "pandoche"; but Pythagoras and Empedocles, with the Peripatetics, called it "sylva"; Plato, however, called it the formless receptacle, mother of the world, container, subject, nurse of forms, and a potency capable of all of them, just as God is potent to make all things, the shaper of all these same things, the first efficient cause in all things, the father of the world, a fount flowing in all things. And again they said that matter is the receiver and expeller of all species, just as the Creator distinguishes them according to divine and causal exemplars. This is non-being, and the passive principle of beings, just as God is the active principle of all things, existing in all things and outside all things. From which it has images, and obscure manifestations, and exact representations of the first being: whence every essence is led to action through potency, and rightly so: for things placed diametrically opposite to each other project certain images of similarity. The first being, incomprehensible to the intellect, also constitutes the extreme (matter) incomprehensible to the intellect: And if anything of them can be apprehended, it will be discovered by negative reasoning: For the first is defined by negation, as Dionysius teaches, that it exists as none of the beings, but as the efficient cause, and better than them. By negation also is the other extreme defined, that it exists as none of the beings, but is inferior to them. The first is most simple, and the last is also most simple. But the latter vacillates, leaping from species to species, while the former is always the same, and always acting, just as the latter is always receiving as long as successive generation endures. The intermediate intervals, however, are found to be less and more perfect by participating in both extremes, the more they approach one of the extremes. Hence Zeno of Citium, son of Mnaseas, posited two principles of things, God and matter: of which he said the former was the cause of acting, the latter of suffering. But Plato and Socrates added a third, the idea, namely in the divine senses and visions of God, or in the divine mind, or word: as our Theologians are accustomed to say, which nevertheless is the same. But here the sequence of things must be observed. Matter and its pure potency respond to the omnipotent Father: whence not without mystery Moses introduces God as the creator and maker of this matter, which corresponds to Him without any intermediate cause. But other produced things he recounts through intermediate causes, yet by the command of the first parent and supreme maker: so that the production of matter, and matter itself when produced, differs from the production of other things, and from those things brought forth into light: so much so, that Timaeus Locrus and Plato do not—

**[Marginal Notes]**

(Beside lines 5-6)
Eusebius
Pamp.

(Beside lines 9-11)
Pythagoras
Empedocles
Peripatetics
Plato

(Beside line 22)
Dionysius

(Beside line 29)
Zeno

(Beside lines 31-32)
Plato
Socrates
Theologians

(Beside lines 38-39)
Timaeus
Plato

--- Page 394 ---
SEVENTH TONE. 128

one should avoid a spurious conception of matter, and one alien from the conception of other things.
With which the earth is established. Chapter III.
[Large decorative initial E] We have revealed that all elements are found in the heavens, angels, and God, each with its proper mark: Now, however, it occurs to us to explain with what harmony these same elements agree with the archetype. For indeed, the paternal mind is most fruitful of all, so that it might produce those two offspring, namely the Son, and simultaneously with Him the Holy Spirit: by whom it produced all other things of this universe, and the whole globe itself: Which filial offspring, having completed the decreed course of times by itself, it gave for the salvation of the nations. Concerning this, Isaiah, [Marginal note: Isaiah] conscious of these Sacraments, prayed, saying: Let the earth be opened, and let it sprout a savior. [Marginal note: Theologians] Our Theologians interpret this concerning the blessed virgin, the Hebrews concerning the ultimate measure of the archetype (which they call Shekinah, that is, the mediated and domestic habitation of God in us). But (if I am not mistaken) it can rightly be understood concerning the paternal mind: which is primarily the first producer of the Son, and consequently of all other things. For concerning the Son, who is called the Word and Truth of God, the Prophet [Marginal note: David] sings: Truth has sprung from the earth. Who is also called the water of salvation gushing forth from the same earth. This earth, therefore, is receptive of all fecundities, and consequently, as it were, the first parent, also generative of all things: so much so that (according to Plutarch) [Marginal note: Plutarch. Physicists. Moses.] physicists believe that God auspiciously began the creation of the world from the earth as from a center, and the mother of all. Which Moses also indicates, narrating the production which God commanded to be made, having laid the elemental foundations, saying: Let the earth bring forth green herb, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after its kind. And just as these earthly [Marginal note: CHRIST.] trees, unless they are planted in the earthly element, certainly do not live: so concerning the better, and rational tree, the supreme Truth says, that unless it is planted by the Father, the supreme farmer, namely in that supernal earth, it will be uprooted. This earth also stands eternally, never torn from its center, nor destined for another place, while all other elements and elementary things are agitated by a certain succession, and seeking diverse spaces. And that paternal mind is always stable in itself, neither sent, nor moved from its center, even if the Son, the Holy Spirit, and all intelligences are said to be sent to execute diverse things. Again, the earth is the center of the universe: and the Father is the center of the intellectual sphere, existing everywhere through His essence and power: but appearing with open presence in the celestial palace, as their earth and habitation. To which the Prophet, [Marginal note: David] sighing, said: I believe to see the good things of the Lord in the land of the living.

With which the other elements resonate in the same way. Chapter IIII.
[Large decorative initial A] Water, in which is the seminal virtue of animals (since their seed is watery), agrees with the Son: who, being true water, contains the seminal virtue of all things, John [Marginal note: John. Moses.] saying: All things were made through the Word. And this is what Moses said on the part of the commanding Creator: Let the waters bring forth the creeping thing, or the brood of a living soul, and the flying [creatures].

--- Page 395 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

...flying things hovering over the earth, and over the face of the globe of the heavens. Hence perhaps Tha
[Marginal note: Thales] les of Miletus, from whom the Ionic sect originated, believed water to be the principle of all things: and
that all things resolve into water itself, and all the same things are nourished by it, and deprived of it,
they dry up. And although the seeds of fruits and herbs are earthy, Trismegistus nevertheless
[Marginal note: Trism.] judged it necessary for them to be moistened, if they were to be fertile: For they were moistened
from the beginning in the fount of divine ideas. They are also moistened either by earthy moisture, or
by dew, or by rain, or by water added intentionally: if they are to germinate.
[Marginal note: Genesi.] Hence it is not without reason said in the description of the mundane fabric, that shrubs
and plants had not germinated: because God had not rained upon the earth. Nor
does spiritual generation occur without water, which is the Son of God: as Nicodemus
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] himself said: Unless one is born again of water and the Holy Spirit, he cannot enter
the kingdom of God. For from that divine water it receives the power of divine generation: but from
that fiery spirit, the nourishment of life and sustenance. Nor is it to be thought that man must be
born again of this elemental water, to be fit for the kingdom of God: but from that divine
water, of which this elemental water is a sign and a sacrament. Again, water is a ne-
cessary drink for sustaining the life of all plants and animals: although for man, as a royal
living being, a more elegant drink has been prepared, namely the water
[Marginal note: Idem.] which that vine continually distills, which says: I am the true vine, and my Father
is the vinedresser. From which vine, water, imbibing a certain solar and beneficial
virtue, becomes a more profitable and celebrated drink for man, the overseer of all
created things: and the legitimate heir of the Creator himself. And there is also the most wise
[Marginal note: Ecclesia.] drink of the Son of God for a purified mind, as it is said in Ecclesiasticus: And the water of saving
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] wisdom gave him to drink. Which also cries out, saying: If anyone thirsts, let him come to me,
and drink. And again, speaking with that Samaritan woman, it says: If anyone drinks of the water that
[Marginal note: Idem] I will give, it will become in him a fountain of water springing up into eternal life. But this also,
sometimes distilled through that super-mundane vine, is converted into the most salutary wine
[Marginal note: Salomon CHRI STVS.] to be drunk by his chosen family: To which the Wise Man invited in the Canticles,
saying: Come, and be inebriated, dearest ones. Of which wine, in the last supper
celebrated by the true vine itself, he said: Drink ye all of this, that is, of this earthly
wine changed into heavenly, adding: But I will not drink henceforth of this
fruit of the vine, until I drink it new with you in my Father's house: where the
[Marginal note: Dauid.] wine is administered, of which the prophet, speaking of the heavenly banquet, sang in the psalm:
My intoxicating cup, how glorious it is. This water is also washing, cleansing,
[Marginal note: Apocal. Zach.] and purifying. And concerning the Son of God, John says: Who loved us, and washed us from
our sins, namely with the water of that fountain, of which Zechariah prophesied: In
that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David for the washing of the sinner, and of the menstruous
[Marginal note: Paulus] woman. With these, Paul, discussing this Son of God with the Hebrews, says: Upholding
all things by the word of his power, making purification of sins, namely by watery
[Marginal note: Isaias] virtue. Isaiah, however, calls the same a spirit of judgment, yet watery: just as he calls another divine
shoot a spirit of burning, saying: Everyone whose name will be saved...

--- Page 396 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 129

shall have been written in the book of life in Jerusalem. And this if the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, that is, of the chosen souls in the spirit of judgment, and in the spirit of ardor.
Judgment belongs to the Son, who says: The Father has given all judgment to me. Ardor [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] however is referred to the Holy Spirit, who perfects and cleanses those things which the Son had moistened by purifying and washing: To this ardor corresponds this elemental fire, which cooks raw things and heats them: which purifies gold and other metals, and melts diverse things into one: which finally transmutes one nature into another; thus it cooks and seasons those raw and dreadful things: so that they can be presented as dishes of God at the table in a heavenly and deifying symposium. For when he spoke of the Samaritans beginning now to whiten and to be cooked like harvests through the disposition of the Holy [Marginal note: Idem.] Spirit, he said: I have other food to eat, which you do not know, namely, the prepared souls of the Samaritans: and which were already being cooked within by the operation of the Deifying fire: It heats and expels all coldness of sin and fear, because grace cannot coexist with sin. And charity, if it is perfect (says John), casts out fear. The power of that sacred [Marginal note: Ioan.] flame in the time of the Apostles melted the hearts of the people hearing those inflamed words, so that soon for all there was one heart and one soul. And it melts so much that it cannot be separated, as Paul says: Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? That fiery spirit [Marginal note: Paulus] poured into us also purifies all the dross of sin and concupiscence.
It also transmutes, so much so that it rendered a shepherd boy and lyre-player into a most exquisite prophet and Psalm-writer. It fills fishermen, and constitutes them teachers of nations, and lights of the world. It pours over the persecutor Paul, and changes him into a vessel of election, and into Paul. It happens therefore, that as many as are turned from evil into good, it is by the benefit of this heat. But air (as Abraham teaches in the book on for- [Marginal note: Abrahā] mation) is not numbered among the elements: but is held as a medium, glue, and bond connecting diverse things together: therefore it rightly corresponds (to use his words) to the spirit, which is of the spirit. But lest pious ears be offended, thinking that two holy spirits are asserted, we will say that it agrees with the power of the spirit uniting all things that seem discordant, and resounding in all the pipes of the worldly instrument. And this is what is said through Ezekiel: And the spirit [Marginal note: Ezechf.] of life was in the wheels. And what is taught here about the worldly instrument, Paul teaches about the human instrument, [Marginal note: Paulus] while he says: But the same spirit divides to each one as he wills. And in many places it is held that the Holy Spirit fills men, who is called fire, because he purifies and melts. But air because it connects, binds, glues, and fills all things to be filled by it.

What stones signify therein. Chapter V.

**A**D elements coming, let us begin with stones, which are earthy, and being suited for foundations and buildings, correspond to the Father and the Son. Hence sometimes for one, sometimes for the other, sometimes for both, rock or stone is taken. For the Son showed himself to be the rock, [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]

R

--- Page 397 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

when he said to Peter: "And upon this rock I will build my church." i.e., upon
[Marginal note: Paulus] himself, as all explain. He indeed is the foundational stone, as the Apostle says: "No
one can lay another foundation, except that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus:" Who also
is called the cornerstone, indeed rejected by those who build according to the flesh and blood:
but placed by the supreme architect in the head of the corner of that structure and building
of the holy Jerusalem, which is built from living stones. He also was that rock
struck by Moses, from which waters flowed for the drink of the Israelite people, if well in-
[Marginal note: Idem] terpreted by Paul when speaking with the Corinthians. "All (he says) our fathers were under the cloud,
all passed through the sea, and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and the sea:
and all ate the same spiritual food, and all drank the same spiritual drink:
For they drank from the spiritual rock that followed them, but that rock was
Christ." But if by water we wish to understand the wisdom of God, who is the Son,
as we referred to above: the rock from which that water of saving wisdom flowed, rightly
signifies the Father: Which is called סלע in Hebrew, which we can interpret as strong, or rocky mountain,
or refuge. And who is strong, and omnipotent, and the supreme refuge
of all, except the eternal Father? Nor should anyone wonder that we now take rock for
the Father, now for the Son: because in sacred writings it is sometimes placed for both si-
multaneously. For אבן (even) in Hebrew signifies stone, of which word if the first two
letters are taken, they make אב (ab), which signifies Father: But if the middle with the
last is joined, they constitute בן (ben), which is interpreted as Son. Therefore אבן, which
we call rock, signifies both Father and Son, who are the same, indeed rejected
by those who build and construct doctrines and statutes for the Hebrews, or
Gentiles: who do not confess God the Father, and His Son Jesus Christ: Which
now is called water flowing from the rock, now the very same rock: because it proceeds
from the Father, yet always existing as the same with the Father. But how, and why Moses struck this
rock, and why from that striking God, angered against Moses
himself and Aaron, said: "Because you did not believe me, so as to sanctify me
before the children of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this people into the land
which I gave them," this matter would require a deeper investigation. He struck twice, with a double
error, namely: One, because he believed less than he ought: The other, indeed,
because he transgressed the command: For the Lord had commanded that they should speak
to the rock: and Moses, with Aaron's consent, struck it: And therefore God complained
that they had not believed, namely that His word alone would suffice, and
that they had transgressed the limits of the command by striking the rock, to which the Lord
had commanded that they should only speak. And this was their sin, not however,
because they claimed for themselves what they ought to have attributed to God, as many ex-
plain. Nor was it a small transgression to carry out God's work through severity (for
striking implies this), which God by piety, so that He might be more sanctified among the
people, had determined to accomplish, commanding that with a pious and sweet word, without striking,
they should draw water from the rock: since the waters of mercy were not to be drawn out

--- Page 398 ---
TONE SEVENTH. 130

through the harsh pipe of justice. Therefore, after they wished to deal with the people with an iron rod (as they say), they deserved to feel the divine, and iron, sentence, by which it was said: "You shall not bring this people into the land which I gave them." Perhaps it would be too long and mysterious for this place to inquire into, to unravel all the secrets that could be revealed about the rock: and why it is sometimes called אבן eben, sometimes סלע selah, sometimes צור zur, concerning which David says in the psalm, בצור bezur, that is, "He exalted me in the rock": which word perhaps also [Marginal note: Dauid] signifies the name of God. But omitting these things, let us come to our topic, concluding that in the archetype, from which all strength and virtue is drawn by any inferior thing, is the idea and virtue of the rock, to which this inferior subjection is suitably equated.

What place metals hold there. Chapter VI.

[Large decorative initial M] Etals, which are watery, correspond to that supreme water: concerning which it is said in Ezekiel: "I will pour upon you living water," [Marginal note: Ezechi.] namely God the Son: who is also called the water of life and wisdom, and full of hidden treasures: which, as a true leader and commander of the entire spiritual army, he most copiously dispenses according to the need of each, giving to all who are newly enrolled in his army a most opulent gift, as it is said through the prophet Hosea: "I multiplied silver and gold," [Marginal note: Osee.] namely, in a gift. But he complains that his soldiers dedicated it to Baal, polluting the divine gifts and charisms, as he continues with a more open complaint in Joel, saying: "You [Marginal note: Ioël.] have taken my silver and my gold: and you have brought my desirable things and my most beautiful things into your temples." Just as we read about Belshazzar in Daniel, who [Marginal note: Daniel] profaned golden and silver vessels and all precious things by abusing them with banqueters, harlots, and gluttons: Whom (alas!) very many imitate, abusing the gift of grace and the gifts of the Holy Spirit in the worst things, forging an idol and a calf of their prostitution, just as those transgressors of old, whom God led out of Egypt with much silver and gold, with which they should have bought necessities and offered for the building of the Lord's tabernacle, forged it into an idol of scandal and perdition. Therefore, grace and divine charisms have been imparted to us through God the Son, true gold and silver: of which God is the rightful owner, who through Haggai [Marginal note: Aggeus] protests, saying: "Mine is the gold, and mine is the silver." Yet he willingly communicates it to us, having a certain pleasing exchange, concerning which it is said in Revelation: [Marginal note: Apocal.] "I counsel you to buy from me gold refined by fire, that you may be rich." Nor do we have anything that we can exchange, except our transgressions, sins, and free will. But sometimes it is freely imparted for necessary food and clothing, so that we may appear in the royal presence and at the heavenly wedding feasts: But if we lose it, woe to us, for being cast out from the wedding feasts, we shall be thrown into outer darkness. And this is what Jeremiah [Marginal note: Ierem.] lamented in his Lamentations, saying: "The noble sons of Zion, clothed in the finest gold, how they have been turned into earthen vessels." And again: "How the gold has become dim." And through Isaiah it is said: "Your [Marginal note: Isaias] silver has turned into dross," namely, with spiritual knowledge obscured, charity grown cold, and charisms defiled or put to flight.

--- Page 399 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Regarding divine matters. And the heavenly Emperor is the possessor of so much gold that we read in the Apocalypse that even the pavement of the supernal city, rebuilt by Him, is made of gold [Marginal note: Job]. But Job goes further, saying that even the clods of earth of that supernal region are made of gold, so that the earth may agree with the pavement, and with the unique foundation [Marginal note: Paul], who is Jesus the Son of God Himself, as the Apostle says: Upon which He persuades us also to build with gold, silver, and precious stones: Which signified all the offerings that were commanded to be made in the old law. But also, with this treasure imparted to us, He commands that we gain super-mundane riches with five, two, or [Marginal note: Matthew] one talent given to us, as Matthew relates: or ten, or five, or only one mina, [Marginal note: Luke] as we read in another evangelist, threatening most severely unless we take care to increase the money and multiply the heavenly treasures, into which we ought to transform these dregs of treasure.

Nor does this God the Son claim for Himself only the more precious metals that pertain to treasure, but also all other molten and fusible [metals], which are of the same kind, prepared by the craftsman for various purposes, but especially for waging war and preserving empire. For this, iron is necessary for the punishment of evildoers, and for the stable strength of the kingdom and empire of the Son of God Himself: concerning whom it is said in the psalm [Marginal note: David]: The Lord said to me, You are my Son, today I have begotten you: Ask of me, and I will give you the nations for your inheritance, and the ends of the earth for your possession: [Marginal note: The same.] And you shall rule them with a rod of iron. And again in another psalm: To bind their kings with fetters, and their nobles with iron manacles. But also concerning [Marginal note: Apocalypse] iron for military matters it is said in the Apocalypse, that a sword proceeded from His mouth, sharp on both sides, namely, for conquering and suppressing rebels. And if the time for vengeance or justice is not at hand, yet iron is still [Marginal note: Jeremiah] sought, with which sins to be punished may be written, as we read in Jeremiah: The sin [Marginal note: Job] of Judah is written in an iron book. So also Job says, That they may be engraved in an iron book.

Bronze is also necessary for casting the vessels of the temple: therefore not without [Marginal note: Exodus] mystery are all the vessels of the tabernacle commanded to be made of bronze in Exodus, similarly also the [Marginal note: 3 Kings] vessels of the temple, and the sea (molten sea), as we read in the third book of Kings: Which very abundant bronze holy David, who bore a most elegant type of the Son of God, full of the Holy Spirit, receiving from the cities of Betah and Beroth of Hadadezer the Assyrian, prepared for casting those vessels, the sea, the altar, and the columns. Indeed, he took bronze from the Assyrians, who are interpreted as merchants, a good merchant: so that he might convert it to a better use, [Marginal note: CHRIST] and to the ministry of God, as the highest Truth teaches, saying: Make for yourselves friends from the mammon of iniquity, namely, by exchanging this bronze, iron, and these stones, which are called precious, for those of the supernal city: in which not only gold, [Marginal note: Deuteronomy] but also precious iron and bronze are found, as Moses speaks typically in Deuteronomy, saying: Its stones are iron, and from its mountains bronze is dug. For neither in this lower land, which is called Canaan or Charam, possessed by that wandering people according to divine promises, are there (as we know and have seen) iron stones: nor is bronze or any metal dug from its mountains: whence concerning a better region—

--- Page 400 ---
...doctrine, and conferring health through sacraments and sacrifices, although it profits them nothing. And these are the leaves, concerning which it is said: "And the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations." And this same tree is sometimes called the knowledge of good and evil, when namely it exi-
R iij

--- Page 401 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

humanity, & united to mortal flesh, experiences also the evil of human passions
along with the good, by which it most fully enjoys that divine portion. This tree is
in the midst of paradise, so that to all, according to the need of the receivers, or the generosity of the giver,	[Marginal note: CHRI]
it may communicate its fruits in equal measure. And from this, he sometimes calls himself a vine,	[Marginal note: STVS.]
saying: I am the vine, & you are the branches: so that in a mystical state, or in a true trans-
formation, which we sometimes make into God, we may be the same plant with the su-
preme one, indeed, its branches & shoots. Of this tree, or vine, & of the entire garden with
the other trees, the cultivator is he of whom it is said: And my Father is the cultivator.
For in that supreme garden not only that divine, exalted, & supramundane
tree is planted, but many others: by which the whole garden is completed, concerning
which it is said in Genesis: The Lord God brought forth from the earth, that is, of living	[Marginal note: Genesi.]
things, every tree, or tree beautiful to behold, & pleasant for eating. And again;
From every tree of the paradise you may eat. For in that paradise there are not these	[Marginal note: Idem.]
vegetative trees: which are accustomed to be

--- Page 402 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 132

...or a servant, a citizen, or a countryman, an artisan, or even a woman: For both sexes are found as much in trees as in living beings: And sometimes God plants them most beautiful even in the celestial paradise: and sometimes He uproots them, as He says through Jeremiah [Marginal note: Jer.]: "Those whom I have planted, I uproot." But through Ezekiel [Marginal note: Ezek.] the whole series of a tree planted in the garden of delights, and irrigated, nurtured, and uprooted, is described under the name of Assur by a certain hyperbole, as Jerome [Marginal note: Hiero. Ezechie.] understands it: For Ezekiel says: "Behold, Assur, like a cedar in Lebanon, beautiful in branches, and leafy in foliage, raised on high: The waters nourished him, the deep exalted him, its rivers went around its planting, and it sent its streams to all the trees of the field:" Therefore it was exalted and raised above all the trees of the field: And it describes that tree as so lofty that in paradise, where it was planted, neither cedar, nor fir, nor cypress, nor any other tree of God's paradise could be compared to it. But lest it trust too much in such great height, he adds: "According to its impiety, I cast it out, and strangers shall cut it down:" And pursuing many things concerning its ruin, he finally adds: "Behold, I have made you descend with the trees of pleasure to the lowest parts of the earth:" From which we are taught that even those planted with whatever sublimity in the paradise of delights fall, just like the first man, and those intelligences that fell: since no one can stand or be raised by himself, as the supreme Truth says: "If anyone (He says) [Marginal note: CHRIST] does not remain in me, he will be cast out like a branch, and will wither, and they will throw him into the fire, and he burns." Therefore there are vegetable trees: there are human trees: there are angelic trees: and there is a supreme, and divine tree. Nor do these vegetable trees flourish, nor do they produce fruit, unless endowed with life and fruitfulness by the supreme [tree] through intermediaries. Nor do human or angelic trees live, or are they stable, unless preserved by that which alone is stable in itself: and from the same they draw life, and are irrigated from that supernal fount, from which comes all good: as Job [Marginal note: Job] relates concerning angels, saying: "Behold, those who serve Him are not stable, or do not believe, that is, firmly: and in His angels He placed change," which some have interpreted as depravity, but others as splendor. And concerning human trees, the supreme Truth said: "He who remains in me, and I in him, [Marginal note: CHRIST] bears much fruit: because without me you can do nothing." Therefore all inferior trees have that supernal tree, to which they correspond: and from which they receive life, growth, and fruits: concerning which it is often hinted in sacred scriptures under the type of these inferior ones. Therefore, concerning that [tree] and other lofty trees (as I believe) taught by the prophets, Plato [Marginal note: Plato] in Phaedrus, speaking through the person of Socrates above human paths, describes that higher and purer world, separating at the same time all things produced for human use from this common condition. For he asserts that those things are purer and more perfect: and that there is true heaven, and true light, and also true earth: From which, if anyone should come to this earth, stones, trees, flowers, fruits, and suchlike, which are cultivated by us, all things would seem gnawed away and corrupted by a certain saltiness of this sea. He also declares how great the difference is between that contemplation which true Saturnians, and from the crowd se-
R iiij

--- Page 403 ---
                                CANTICI PRIMI
inspired, and divine men have, and that which they possess who, entangled in earthly cares of this kind, are contaminated by falsehood, that is, by the wisdom of this worldly sea. For there are (he says) there trees, flowers, fruits, mountains, Sardian stones, Jasper, Emerald, and other things of this kind: of which these (things here) are certain deformed particles, and to the contemplation of these, and clear intuition, we arrive dead, as he very openly revealed above, not indeed by the death of the body, but through a complete sequestration of the senses, and purgative virtues from everything external and alien. But until all those things are offered to us to be seen with clear intuition, and to be contemplated with unveiled face, through these lower things a discourse must be held among us, from which we may be able to hint at supermundane and divine things, and finally, by the auspices of these (lower things), to be carried up to those (higher things), not unmindful of our lot.
      With which our plain may be made equal.            Cap. VIII.

[Decorative initial letter 'IN' in a square frame with floral motifs]
      IN the celestial region there are not only stones, metals, trees, and fruits, to which we can be led by these lower things, but there is also a flat, and mountainous, and rough terrain: and it is fruitful, irrigated, and cultivated: and conversely, wild and arid, just as this lower world is divided. For we see this earth as tripartite, of which one part is flat, habitable, and irrigated: another is desert and arid: the third, however, is mountainous. And some of the mountains, especially the hills, are fertile and rich: and some are deserted and arid. But for now let us proceed concerning the plain, which the Psalmographer testifies is found in that supernal region, saying: He who ascends, or rides upon the plain, the Lord is His name: for which a faulty translation has "setting": For ערבות, that is *haravot*, signifies pleasantness or a plain: which our translator renders "setting," perhaps thinking that word comes from ערב, which denotes evening and that hour when the Sun tends towards its setting: But this (haravot) is pointed with two *segol*, while that (erev) is pointed with *patah* *het* *qamets*, and they differ entirely in meaning. Well then, the Prophet says that God rides upon pleasantness and a plain: since He is most blessed in Himself, containing nothing rough, nothing bristly. But others (and perhaps better) interpret that *haravot* as the empyrean heaven, supremely flat and smooth: in which neither swelling of stars, nor anything humped or rough is found: but it is entirely flat, entirely pleasant, and delightful. But if we wish to ascend still higher to the supermundane plain, namely, we shall find that just as there are supercelestial waters which continually praise the Lord, and waters, and divine fire, as we touched upon above, in like manner, in that archetype, there are plains from which all pleasant, smooth, sweet, delightful, and enjoyable things proceed. And this among ancient Theologians is called the supermundane southern region,      Ant. the.
concerning which it is sung in the Canticles: Tell me, where you feed your flock, where you rest at noon. Et   Canti.
And again: Awake, O south wind, and blow upon my garden, that its spices may flow out, and all delightful things: From which quarter comes He, at whose advent (as Isaiah together with the Baptist testifies) the crooked were made straight, and the rough places into plain ways. For from the south...   Isaias
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

--- Page 404 ---
TONE SEVEN. 133

came the Redeemer, if Habakkuk truly foresaw, who said, "God מתימן that is, from Teman
will come," namely from the South, as Theodoret well interpreted and Jerome [Marginal note: Theod. Hiero.]
agrees in their commentaries, and the truth of the matter is: For to come from the South is to come with the light of truth, and with grace, and mercy:
All of which John touches upon, saying that He Himself is light and truth, and that grace was made and diffused through Him. And just as He came from the shining South and a smooth plain, so by His followers this smooth path must be followed, namely, of peace, gentleness, patience, quietude, equity, piety, and equanimity, so that (if it were possible) nothing harsh, nothing horrid might be found in them. Hence He commanded injuries to be forgiven, peace to be proclaimed and brought to all, [Marginal note: CHRIST]
all things to be patiently endured, saying: "Blessed are the merciful, Blessed are the peacemakers, and blessed are those who suffer persecution for righteousness' sake." Indeed, He also commanded all instruments of war and occasions for fighting to be laid down, according to the prophecy of Isaiah, who says: "And they shall beat [Marginal note: Isaiah]
their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation shall not lift up [Marginal note: CHRIST]
sword against nation, neither shall they learn war anymore." Which Christ observed, commanding Peter to put his sword into its sheath, forbidding all spirit of vengeance. So also when James and John (as Luke narrates) wanted [Marginal note: Luke.]
to call down fire from heaven to consume the Samaritans, who had neglected to receive Christ as a guest, He rebuked them, saying: "You do not know what manner of spirit you are of?" [Marginal note: CHRIST]
namely, of peace and charity. And He added: "The Son of Man did not come to destroy souls, but to save them." Hence He Himself, teaching better by deeds than by words, stood as if mute before those who sheared Him, not opening His mouth, and like a lamb led to the slaughter. Which so many true Christians observed, who for three hundred years, and more than that, endured innumerable kinds of martyrdom with an undisturbed spirit: Among whom neither murmur nor complaint resounded, for they had become imitators of that true Lamb placed at the right hand of God, who was led silently to the sacrifice, not opening His mouth in blasphemy, insults, or any complaints: But alas, unhappy times, when among Christians only the name remains, with all Israelite, indeed Christian, gentleness and mildness put to flight; the pruning hooks and plowshares, into which swords had been beaten, they have again beaten into spears and very sharp and harmful javelins, having become like Esau and the Idumaeans, rough, horrid, and contentious above all nations and peoples, so much so that neither in temporal nor in spiritual matters do they ever cease from disputes, everywhere addicted to perpetual contentions, so that Christ [Marginal note: The same.]
no longer recognizes them as His own, but says to them: "I do not know you," and excludes from the most peaceful, gentle, and pleasant kingdom those who have always pursued rough paths and a harsh life. "We possessed (said Moses in his typical discourse) all the cities [Marginal note: Moses.]
that are situated in the plain," and he himself became their good possessor, concerning whom it is said in Numbers, that he was the meekest man above all who dwelt on the [Marginal note: Numbers.]
earth: By which way also walked he who said: "Remember, O Lord, David, and all [Marginal note: David]
his meekness." Christ also said to His Christians: "Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth," that is, the flat and most peaceful one. But because

R v.

--- Page 405 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

mountains, and their inhabitants are commended in sacred scriptures; therefore, what these
mountains signify must be pursued.
        By what means mountains are exalted.        Chap. XIX.

**A**ll the chosen sons of Israel, entering the land of promise, possessed not only plains, but also mountains, their inhabitants having been conquered and expelled, as we read in
[Marginal note: Iosue] Joshua, where it is said: And Joshua took all the mountainous and southern land, and the land of Jesse, and the plain, and the western region, and the mountain of Israel, and its lowlands, and part of the mountain which ascends Seir as far as Baal-gad through the plain of Lebanon below Mount Hermon, distributing each and every thing to those tribes and families, as it is pursued in a long discourse: All these things happened in figure to those fathers, who held the type of those entering the true land of promise under the leadership of Jesus, whose figure Joshua preceded. For the heavenly land (as we have said) is a true plain, where there are also mountains, both irrigated and arid, and both are necessary. Of the former it is sung in the
[Marginal note: Psalm.] psalms: Watering the mountains from his upper chambers, or his heights, just as these material mountains are watered by higher clouds: but these do not produce spices like those, of
[Marginal note: Cantic.] which it is said in the Canticles: Flee, my beloved, and be like a roe or a young stag upon the mountains of spices. Nor do they distill sweetness like those, of which
[Marginal note: Ioël.] Joel says: And Jerusalem shall be holy, that is, the heavenly Jerusalem, when the number of the elect is complete, or its gates are opened by the Redeemer, so ordered that strangers shall not pass through it, and in that day (as follows) the
[Marginal note: Canti.] mountains shall distill sweetness, and the hills shall flow with milk, just as it says of the whole land of Zebi, that it will flow with milk and honey, not indeed with milk that is pressed from the udders of goats, cows, and sheep, but from those exalted udders, of which it is said: Your breasts are better than wine: Nor with honey that the busy bee extracts from flowers, but with that, of which it is again said: Honey
[Marginal note: Dauid Salomon] and milk are under her tongue: And by David in the psalm: He satisfied them with honey from the rock, that is, with honey flowing from the rock, which is God: For צור, that is Zur, which we have translated as "rock," perhaps signifies the name of God. Therefore those mountains yield both milk and most sweet honey and most fragrant spices: therefore he yearned for them, who said: I will go to the mountains of myrrh. There is, however, among them a preeminent mountain, to which the most merciful God himself often leads us by his kindness,
[Marginal note: Isaias] provided we carry out what he has commanded us: as he declares through Isaiah, saying: Those who keep my Sabbath, and hold fast to my covenant, I will bring to my holy mountain,
[Marginal note: Dauid] and from this, as from a treasury of all treasures, David asserted that he obtained what he sought, saying: He heard me from his holy mountain. And this mountain is sometimes taken for a host, and sometimes for a dwelling place. Of this again the
[Marginal note: Idem Itidem.] Prophet sings: Who shall ascend into the mountain of the Lord, or who shall stand in his holy place? And elsewhere: Lord, who shall dwell in your tabernacle, or who shall rest on your holy mountain? God himself is also a host, the supreme mountain, whose summit is
[Marginal note: Isaias.] raised to an immense height. There is also the exalted mountain, Messiah, of whom Isaiah open-

--- Page 406 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 134**

he says in his sermon: And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established on the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above all hills; and all nations shall flow unto it: and many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, that is, to Christ, and the Church, and he will teach us of his ways: and we will walk in his paths, for out of Zion shall go forth the law, where he poured out his Holy Spirit upon the Apostles, who suggested to them all things that were contained in the law.
It follows: And the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: For the eternal Word of God, made human, frequently spoke in Jerusalem, and in that temple of Jerusalem. This mountain, therefore, was also sometimes called a plain, when in his advent he made all rough places into smooth paths. But it was also called a mountain, exalted above others, because of the eminence of its nature: the fullness of grace, and the summit of virtues and merits. There are also other intellectual mountains, who, as ministers, assist and serve the supreme mountain, of whom Isaiah says: The mountains and [Isaias] hills shall sing praise, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands. For stony and earthly mountains do not sing, nor do combustible trees clap their hands, but rational trees and mountains, of whom again in the psalm: The mountains shall exult together [Psalm.] before the face of the Lord, for he comes: And again: The mountains exulted, or leaped [Psalm.] (according to the Hebrew truth) like rams, and the hills like lambs of sheep: All these things refer to the higher mountains, hills, rams, and lambs, whose image they bear, and to whom they correspond, if they are to be rightly understood. There are also evil mountains, great in strength and malice, as the Lord speaks in Jeremiah, saying: [Ierem.] Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, or desolate, or corruptor: says the Lord, who corrupts the whole earth: I will stretch out my hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, of which you are composed, and will make thee a burnt mountain, where, according to the wise man's saying, the mighty shall mightily suffer torments. [Sapien.] And to Satan, who opposed Zerubbabel building the temple, the Lord says through Zechariah: [Zacha.] Who art thou, O great mountain, before Zerubbabel? But the Lord easily demolishes and scatters these, either by himself, or through mountains chosen by him, as he says to Isaiah: Thou shalt thresh the mountains [Isaias mō-] and beat them small: and shalt make the hills as chaff. And into the lot of these mountains was placed Seir, that is, Sehir, given into the possession of Esau, and the chiefs who came forth from his loins, that is, of the carnal man and all things that pertain to him, as is described in Genesis under a figurative account in a long discourse. For this is indicated by the name Sehir, [Genesi.] which signifies not only that mountain, but also a whirlwind, baseness, evil thought, evil mind, crime, hair, goat, and the devil, not without mystery: To which mountain had ascended he who was the head of all rebellion, baseness, pride, and evil thought, saying: I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God, I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north. And these are mountains deservedly to be explained, as Isaiah infers concerning [Isaias] that prince of arrogance, saying: Nevertheless, thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the lowest parts of the pit. And in particular concerning Mount Seir, the Lord says through Ezekiel: I will give [Ezechie.]

--- Page 407 ---
OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

Mount Seir desolate, and I will take away from it him who goes and him who returns. And concerning this whole
[Marginal note: Abacuc.] multitude, Habakkuk says: The mountains of the world are broken, and the hills of the world are bowed down by its eternal ways. By these mountains of the world, demons are
[Marginal note: Hieron.] understood (as Jerome thinks) who raise themselves against the knowledge of God, and by the hills, other demonic strongholds, which make men admire the beauty of bodies, dignities, the riches of the world, nobility of birth, and other good things of the world. And with these demons and princes of darkness, puffed up and darkened evil men, and they themselves with the princes of obscurity, are called misty
[Marginal note: Ierem.] mountains, concerning which the Lord says through Jeremiah: Let not your feet stumble on the misty and darkened mountains. For these are the mountains and high places where the incense of pride is offered with the greatest indignation of God, as the Lord laments with manifold
[Marginal note: Regum] complaint in the books of Kings, both concerning the people still sacrificing on the high places, and concerning the kings who had not removed those high places. These are also the
[Marginal note: Hiero.] mountains and high places where Saul (as Jerome says) killed the priests of God, puffed up and elevated by the desire to reign against God and against David, when God himself had already handed over the kingdom. For he was in Gibeah, which is interpreted as "high place" or "elevated." From these mountains we must turn away, as from those that will most swiftly fall and be reduced to nothing,
[Marginal note: Apocal. Dauid] whence in the Apocalypse we read that when the cup of God's indignation is poured out, mountains are not found, as also the Psalmist speaks under the figure of a tree, saying: "I saw the wicked greatly exalted and lifted up like the cedars of God, and I passed by, and behold, he was not; I sought him, and his place was not found."

There are indeed also other mountains for us to ascend, namely the pinnacles of
[Marginal note: Pſalm.] virtues, so that we may meet with divine virtue, concerning which the divine Psalmist says: "Your righteousness is like the mountains of God." For in righteousness, which is a common virtue, every
[Marginal note: Dauid] troop of virtues is found. And concerning our virtues, the same Royal Prophet says: "high mountains for deer," that is, the pinnacles of virtues are for those strong
[Marginal note: Hiero. Orige. Canti.] deer who know how to kill the serpent, as Jerome thinks in his commentaries, and Origen in the Song of Songs. But here he adds that mountains also signify eminent cognitions, saying: "One comes leaping upon mountains of high sense and sublime understanding," concerning which it is said: "Behold, here he comes leaping on the mountains, skipping over the hills." And again: "Flee, my beloved, to the mountains of spices." Ascending to which, would that we might deserve, with Elijah and Moses, to hear the voice of the Lord, caressing, teaching, and feeding with that milk and honey with which he fed Moses, and through him
[Marginal note: Ezechil.] all the people from Mount Sinai, so that we may be those sheep, concerning which the Lord says through Ezekiel: "In the richest pastures I will feed my sheep on high mountains." Thus Christ from Mount Tabor fed the three Apostles with such sweetness that Peter, forgetting all other things, exclaimed, saying: "Lord, it is good for us to be here." He also fed from Mount Zion all the Apostles and those who were with them with the supreme food of his Holy Spirit, with which he so refreshed them, suggesting all things to them, that, drenched with a blessed fullness and spiritual intoxication, they proclaimed the mighty works of God in various tongues to the peoples.

--- Page 408 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 135

And for this reason, and others to be passed over for now, the royal prophet celebrates this Mount Sion, saying: "Mount Sion, which I have loved." [Marginal: Dauid Psalm. Psalm. Psalm.] And again: "The Lord loves the gates of Sion." And again: "The God of gods shall be seen in Sion." And elsewhere: "The Lord has chosen Sion, He has chosen it for His dwelling." Thus in many other places. But also through [Marginal: Isaias. Ioëlis. Abdias Ioan.] Isaiah, the Lord Himself says: "I will give salvation in Sion." And in Joel: "I am the Lord your God, who dwell in Sion." And from Obadiah: "In Mount Sion there shall be salvation." John also in his most famous vision: "I saw the Lamb standing on Mount Sion, and with Him a great number of those who were sealed, to all of whom was imparted from His fullness, which we all receive." But (as I think) he speaks of that supreme Sion, to which this lower one, existing in the middle of the world, is perpendicularly subjected, so that from both, the true mediator and supernal fount may distribute to all manna, honey, milk, the water of wisdom, and all good things: so that we may possess not only the plain, but also the irrigated mountain, that is, the eminence of glory and of degrees in that meridian of graces, and Gessem, a region, namely, drenched and moistened by those supernal channels and streams, or that supernal rain, of which in the psalm: "O God, you will set apart a voluntary rain for your inheritance," [Marginal: Psalmus] for Gessem is interpreted as rain. Let us also possess the Plain, and Haravah, of which we spoke above, and the countryside, and the mountains of Israel, not indeed wild and arid, but fertile and excellent, and that part of the mountain which ascends Sehir: For Mount Sehir is the summit of worldly prosperity given to Esau, a part of which was also given to Israel, although a portion of divine things was given to him as the cord of his inheritance, yet they were not destitute in temporal goods, which are called goods of fortune: Which goods true Israelites did not possess separated from their patron, who is God: but together with Him, who said to Abraham: "I will be your exceeding great reward." And of whom the prophet said for himself and [Marginal: Genes. Dauid.] his Israelites: "The Lord is the portion of my inheritance." Therefore, Joshua pointedly said that their part extended to Babalgad, which is interpreted as "patron" or "lord of fortune." There are also arid and desert mountains, which come into lot with the arid land, of which we shall speak presently: Therefore, we shall pass through such dry mountains with dry foot, even to the uncultivated and infertile wilderness, where we shall treat of both.

What is desert, and arid. Chapter X.

[Decorative initial V] Since there is nothing in this lower world without its presiding intelligence (as many wise men agree) and without an idea or measure in the archetype, to which it corresponds and by which it is governed, it is fitting that even the desert and arid places, even those fashioned by the hand of the Lord, should have their intelligences, and something in the supermundane court, by whatever name it may be called: from which they receive their aridity, or are excluded from the irrigation of the supreme fount, from which comes all true irrigation. Therefore, the desert (to begin with the etymology of the word) is a place destitute and abandoned by celestial favor, just as the Hebrew word, which is מדבר, that is midbar, also sounds, and this is said to be without anything fertile according to the etymology of its language: It is also called arid or dry, as be-

--- Page 409 ---
**CANTICLE THE FIRST**

nor does the Hebrew word sound like 'waters gathered in one place'. Therefore, when the super-mundane waters are gathered into one place, other places remain with a dry influx, not irrigating nor moistening those things they care for: therefore all those places remain parched and dry, deprived of celestial benefit, as it is sung in the
[Marginal note: Psalm.] psalm: "When you turn away your face, they will be troubled: you will take away their spirit, which is given by heavenly irrigation, and they will fail, and return to their dust." And
[Marginal note: Leuiti.] in Leviticus the Lord says: "If you do not listen to me, I will give you a heaven above like iron, and an earth like bronze: Your labor will be consumed in vain, the earth will not bring forth its seed, nor will the trees yield fruit." Conversely, however, let us hear what the
[Marginal note: Deuter.] supreme ruler promises to those who do good in Deuteronomy: "The Lord himself says, 'He will open his best treasure, heaven, to give rain to your land in its season: And he will bless all the works of your hands.'" But it must be noted that desert and dry places are of multiple kinds: For some are only deprived of heavenly irrigation, not indeed entirely, because they would tend to nothingness: but some more, and others less, according to the suitability of those receiving, or according to the command of the irrigator.

Some are also dried up not only by the deprivation of the supreme irrigation, but by the Chaldean fire of that furnace, whose flame ascended forty-nine cubits, namely the square of the number of remission and punishment: and such places are so parched that they become habitations for Tartarean citizens, just as
[Marginal note: Ioannes] John says in the Apocalypse concerning Babylon, deprived of heavenly favor and consumed by its own fire: "that it has become a dwelling place for demons, and a prison for every unclean spirit." No less does God threaten concerning another Babylon, and wretched Rome,
[Marginal note: Isaias Hieron.] through Isaiah under the name of Bozrah, that is, 'the vintager,' as Jerome explains: For this one has harvested the entire world, first indeed with a temporal sword, then with a spiritual sword: Therefore he says: "And its streams will be turned into pitch, and its soil into sulfur, and its land will become burning pitch night and day, and it will not be extinguished forever. Its smoke will ascend from generation to generation, and it will be desolate for ages of ages. No one will pass through it, but the hoopoe, the owl, the ibis, the hedgehog, the pelican, the lamia, the hairy onocentaur, and whatever terrifying kind will inhabit it." Through all these, diverse kinds of unclean spirits are understood: The prince of these is עזאזל, that is, Azazel,
[Marginal note: Leuiti.] for whom we have, I know not in what sense, 'emissary' translated in the book of Leviticus. Therefore, to this one dwelling in the desert, and to the prince of desert spirits, was sent the goat of lot and sin: and it was commanded to be released there not without great mystery, namely, that sin, and whatever pertains to it that is dry and bristly, might be released to the devil dwelling in the uncultivated wilderness and squalid desert. But the other goat, which is the flesh and its concupiscence, let us offer to the Lord, crucifying it,
[Marginal note: Paulus] according to the apostolic monument: "But those who are Christ's have crucified their flesh with its vices and concupiscences:" so that at last it may live, even it, with the spirit before the Lord, as the goat standing alive before the Lord signified. From the Gosp

--- Page 410 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 136**

also in the Gospel we have that the desert is the seat of evil spirits, with Luke [Marginal note: Luke.] narrating that that wicked man, vexed by a spirit, with broken chains, was driven by a demon into the desert. Also said to dwell in the desert are those who are deprived of heavenly irrigation, either serving sins, or expurgating them through penance, not yet worthy of heavenly dew. Therefore it is notably said in Genesis [Marginal note: Genesis.] that Ishmael, expelled from Abraham's house, and serving with bow and arrows, dwelt in solitude in the desert of Paran. And for those not yet well initiated and disposed to heavenly showers, it is said that John the Baptist preached the baptism of repentance in the desert, where the boy (he) dwelt, not yet well-sprinkled. And Moses, already a partaker of heavenly influences, fed the flock not within the inner chambers, but beyond the desert. But also through the desert he led the entire Israelite people, bearing the type of all those who strive through penance to ascend to the super-heavenly homeland. Christ also, the example of all, and leader of penance and the beginning of evangelical life, wished to act in the desert, where he was led by the Holy Spirit: so that he might fast, and enter into battle with the prince of this desert world, and (with those) abandoned by super-heavenly irrigation. Thus also David, a figure preceding Christ himself and the future church, before he came to the kingdom (which prefigured that kingdom which is within us), dwelt in the desert, he himself, and the men who were with him. In the desert is also every soul newly entering into the prison of this body, where it is abandoned by wisdom, virtue, knowledge, and the performance of good works, according to that of Zephaniah [Marginal note: Zephaniah.]: "And he will make the beautiful (place/soul) into a solitude and a wilderness, as in a desert." But the more the soul is separated from the desert of this body, the more it is disposed to heavenly influence, and is filled with an abundance of all fragrant good things, like spices: as it is said in the Song of Songs [Marginal note: Song of Songs.]: "Who is this who ascends from the desert, like a column of smoke from the spices of myrrh, and frankincense, and all the perfumer's powder?" But also, seeing her fortified by the favor of the most beloved Son of God, from whose fullness we have all received, again it says [Marginal note: Ibidem]: "Who is this who ascends from the desert, overflowing with delights, leaning upon her beloved son?" And sometimes she is so imbued with such charisms that it overflows even into the body, which was a desert, as the Psalmist says [Marginal note: David Psalm.]: "The beautiful places of the desert will grow fat." And again: "You have made the desert into pools of water." And through Isaiah [Marginal note: Isaiah.], to the needy and poor seeking water, the Lord says: "I will make the desert into pools of water, and the pathless land into springs of water." But often the opposite happens, that a fruitful soul, adhering to a dry body, is itself abandoned, with Zechariah [Marginal note: Zechariah.] saying: "They have made the desirable land into a desert," a land indeed good and suitable for receiving heavenly seed, so that it might yield a hundredfold fruit. These rebels the Lord hates and abandons, as he himself says through Malachi [Marginal note: Malachi.] concerning Esau, who signifies our animal nature, hated by Him, and to be hated by us. "Esau," he says, "I have hated, and I have made his mountain Seir into a solitude, and his inheritance into dragons of the desert." For God would not relegate Esau, Ishmael, all sinners, our body, and evil spirits to the desert, unless the desert itself belonged to him, and something in

--- Page 411 ---
CANTICLE THE FIRST

archetype: to which such things may correspond and be at hand. It is therefore (unless I am mistaken) the tribunal of that severe justice itself, which the Hebrews [Hebrew: דין], that is, din, call, or it is that measure of severity, from which all things are hard, rough, and burned by fire: Whence also are fiery angels, and ministers of its most severe justice, who in ancient scripture are called sons of Elo-
[Marginal note: John] him: but by John in his Apocalypse, angels of harm, to whom it was given to harm the earth, and the sea, trees, men, and all things subject to divine judgment. Thence
[Marginal note: Job] also are opposing angels, and testing those who are in the crucible of this bodily mass: hence they are named Satan, that is, adversaries: according to that of Job: When the sons of Elohim stood before the Lord, Satan also came, girded to oppose Job, and to test his patience and faithfulness to the Lord. And when punishments are sent from there, and dangers to men occur, also droughts occur, with the supernal irrigation withdrawn, so that they may be tested, or that the delinquents may receive the condign punishment of their transgression: To whom may the most merciful moderator bring aid with the favor and sprinkling of his tribunal of kindness, and of sprinkling grace, and of soothing mercy.

What of the fruitful earth. Chapter XI.
[Marginal note: Genesis] [N]o one doubts that all earth is dry by its own nature, as it is said in Genesis: The earth was formless and void: And again: God called the dry land earth: and this until it is irrigated by its own springs, as it follows in the same place: A spring ascended, irrigating the entire face of the earth. Therefore, moistened by this irrigation, the earth becomes good, which we have proven above to be of many kinds,
[Marginal note: Job] elemental, human, celestial, angelic, divine, and infernal: which by Job is called the land of misery and darkness: where the shadow of death, and no order, but eternal horror dwells. But setting aside this [earth] as always dry and scorched by eternal fire, let us pursue what is fertile and whence it is irrigated. For this elemental earth is only fertile as much as it is irrigated by supernal springs, not indeed by common rain only, which descends upon sterile mountains, rocks, dry land, and entirely into infertile sand: but from superior waters, and celestial, and supercelestial ones. For the fruitful earth does not receive natural fertility from elsewhere, as we can easily prove from many places of sacred scripture, but from very many I will adduce even a few. Therefore Moses says
[Marginal note: Deut.] in Deuteronomy: If you hear the voice of the Lord, he will make you abound in all your works, with the fruit of your womb, the fruit of your livestock, and the fruit of your land, which the Lord swore to give to your fathers, that he might give it to you. The Lord will open the excellent treasure, heaven, that he may give rain to your land in its time.
[Marginal note: Ezechi.] And through Ezekiel he says: I will give a blessing around my hill, and I will bring down rain in its time, and there will be rains of blessing: And the tree of the field will yield its fruit, and the earth will yield its produce.
[Marginal note: Zacha.] Also in Zechariah he says: These things I will do for the remnant of this people: the vineyard will yield its fruit, and the earth will yield its produce, and the heavens will give their dew. And if he does this, as in many cases, through causes

--- Page 412 ---
TONVS SEPTIMVS. 137

secondary [causes], yet sometimes it acts immediately: as the Lord speaks in the clearest language in Deuter- [Marginal note: Deut.]
onomy, saying: "The land, which you are entering to possess, is not like the land
of Egypt, from which you came out: where, after sowing seed, water is led by irrigation in the manner of gardens,
but it is mountainous and a plain, expecting rains from heaven, which the Lord
your God always visits, and His eyes are upon it from the beginning of the year even to the end.
And if you obey My commandments, which I command you today, that you love
the Lord your God, and serve Him with all your heart, and with all your soul,
He will give rain to your land, early and late: so that you may gather grain,
wine, oil, and hay from the fields to feed the livestock." Most beautiful is this
doctrine, by which we are taught that Egypt, which signifies this world and worldly people,
receives irrigation from secondary causes following the order which He gave them,
He who makes His sun rise on the good and the bad, and rains on the just and
the unjust: but that special places, and their inhabitants, receive immediate increase
from the very source of all good, who, beyond what the order of secondary causes
demands, opens veins and channels of His goodness, diffusing and sending it when
and where He pleases. That is also called a work of nature, because from ordered causes,
and acting immutably at the command of the Creator, or from an intelligence (as they say)
not erring in commanding, or in executing: But in this particular way
the Creator works according to the merits, or misdeeds, of the recipients, so that beyond the general
and common care for all, which they call natural influx, He
Himself, a free moderator, bestows abundance according to the disposition of those who receive, to the deserving,
according to the promises adduced, and withdraws it from the undeserving: Which we can also
prove from several places in Scripture: For He threatened in the same repetition of the law, saying: "If you are unwilling to hear the voice of the Lord your God, cursed [Marginal note: Deuter.]
shall be the fruit of your womb, and the fruit of your land, the herds of your cattle, and the flocks
of your sheep: and the Lord will strike you with poverty, fever, cold, heat, burning, and
corrupted air: And the heaven above you shall be bronze, and the earth which you tread, iron: The
Lord will give the rain of your land as dust, and so on: which follow:" Which
happened at various times: For in the time of Elisha, that most fertile land was dried up,
so that the inhabitants of Jericho said to him, as we read in the fourth book of Kings: [Marginal note: Regū 4.]
"These waters are very bad, and the land is barren, and the whole plain around Asphalt,"
which (as is read in Genesis) before the Lord overthrew that Pentapolis [Marginal note: Genesi.]
was irrigated, like the paradise of God, now (as we have seen) it is entirely dried up, like
the ashes of a furnace, according to that of Jeremiah: "From the face of the curse the fields are dried up." [Marginal note: Ierem.]
Which also happened because of the wickedness of Ahab in the time of Elijah, when rains were forbidden
for three years. And concerning such things the Psalmist says: "He turned a fruitful [Marginal note: Dauid]
land into a salt marsh because of the wickedness of those who dwell in it." Therefore, whatever land it may be,
if it is to be fertile, it is necessary that it be irrigated from supernal springs through that
land, concerning which the prophet says: "I believe that I shall see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living:"
Which, irrigated by higher channels, like a higher pool, pours into
s

--- Page 413 ---
**CANTICI PRIMI**

[Marginal note: The same (author/prophet discusses)] the lower earth, and its inhabitants. And concerning that (land), the same prophet says: "You have visited the earth, and drenched it, you have greatly enriched it." For he does not speak of this worldly (earth), but of the divine, as he hints in what follows: "The river of God is full of water." For the river of God does not suit this lowest earth, but that heavenly one, and the better hills and valleys, concerning which it is further stated: "And the hills shall be girded with exultation, and the valleys shall abound with grain, they shall shout, and sing hymns." This, finally, is that land, concerning which we read in Genesis, that before the Lord rained, a spring, or vapor (as the truth of the text has it) ascended from the earth, watering the entire face of the earth: Which land of the living is watered by a supramundane vapor, which, like the water of life, ascended and ascends from that land: Which is also watered by that spring, which, divided into four rivers, moistens, dampens, and renders fruitful the entire circuit of lands: From which land, as from a [Marginal note: Isaac] true fount of all graces and blessings, Isaac, well-initiated in this manner, wished to bless both of his sons, repeating that for both: "In the fatness of the earth, and in the dew of heaven, shall your blessing be." But

--- Page 414 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 138**

...the origin of all sweet rivers and regions made fertile by rain. Moreover, its water, passing through subterranean channels to springs, leaves behind with its humidity and virtue that from which the earth, sown by solar rays, produces metals: Yet it receives this fertility from those supernal waters, concerning which it is said: "Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life." [Genesis] For not every living soul is produced from the sea, but from those waters which are above the heaven: And if the intervening [heaven] did not obstruct, those most excellent waters would render these lower ones, and the earth, and all lower things more fertile: For the intermediate heaven obstructs, indeed, the ministers presiding therein, like censors, lest more be distributed to the lowest things than they deserve, or than the order or disposition of the prince demands: If any fertility is nevertheless found in waters of this kind, this comes from that exalted sea which is above the heaven, divided into twelve signs: Which, so that it might represent the image of the world in the temple of God, Solomon made the brazen sea supported by twelve oxen: [Solomon] of which three looked towards the east, as many towards the south, three towards the west, and as many towards the north, just as the twelve signs of heaven are divided by the same aspects: as is most common among astronomers. Therefore, the exalted sea and the abyss of infinite substance is God: as Damascenus says. [Damascenus] And since all things are contained in God himself, there is a particular place, or measure, which is called the sea, or waters, or a collection of waters. And that is the supernal southern region, in which (as is held in ancient Theology) is the water of supreme wisdom, mercy, clemency, piety, and grace: Which is the peculiar possession of the Son of God, concerning whom the Father says: "And I will set his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers. He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father: and I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth." [Psalm] Next to this, the Queen of heavens holds a place in those mansions, who is therefore called the mother of mercy, grace, and piety: Which her name also indicates, written in the Hebrew idiom with these letters מרים Miriam, which, if written by *sirup* or a revolution of letters according to their custom, says רם ים *ram yam*: Which signifies "exalted sea": With which she is so united that she is considered the same sea, as Gabriel wished to intimate in the heavenly oracle when he said: "Thou hast found favor with God immediately:" [Gabriel] and not that [grace] which is distributed to lower beings under the intervening globe of the heavens. Jonah, knowing this sea and these waters, when he had been chosen as a harsh messenger to the Ninevites, a good and pious man, a simple dove in name and deed, [Jonah] lest he should deliver severe commands, took his journey to that very sea, sometimes signified by Tarshish, as Jerome also understands in his commentaries on Jeremiah, saying: "By Tarshish, every sea is understood, according to that of the psalm: 'Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish.'" [Jerome. Psalm] For he wished to go there, so that from there he might bring back mercy and pardon for the Ninevites: Which he also did, having nevertheless taken the punishment upon himself, so that God's justice might be preserved, which permits no offense to go unpunished. Hence, to calm the tempestuous impulses aroused by the ministers of God's severe justice, he says: "Behold me, cast me into this agitated sea, and the waves will cease," having evidently taken up...

--- Page 415 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

the punishment which the Ninevites owed. For God indeed held this work of charity as pleasing, however, He willed that the Ninevites themselves should cooperate in appeasing the divine tribunal by their own proper penitence, which they performed at the preaching of Jonah, and they were saved. To this
[Marginal note: IESVS] sea also our redeemer Jesus fled, that from there He might obtain pardon for us, and grace in such great abundance, indeed, that it would suffice for the whole world, and for a thousand worlds. Hence, He offered water freely to those Samaritans, and to all people in the temple. But that He might satisfy the tribunal of divine justice, which demands punishment for sins, He willingly offered Himself to the agitated sea, taking upon Himself all storms and waves, according to that
[Marginal note: Pſalm.] of the psalm: *All your waves you have brought upon me.* God willed, however, that we ourselves should cooperate through works of penitence, returning to God Himself, as cried out the Re-
[Marginal note: Bapti.] deemer Himself, and His forerunner, both saying: *Repent, and the kingdom of heaven will draw near,* pardon having already been obtained. Therefore, by a great mystery
[Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] it was said: *No sign will be given to you, except the sign of Jonah the prophet,* who, just as he obtained pardon for the people of one city, having taken upon himself the penitence of a three-day burial in the belly of a fish, so the universal Redeemer obtained remission for the whole human
[Marginal note: Iſaias] race, having taken upon Himself punishment, according to that of Isaiah: *He was bruised for our iniquities,* indeed, by a very great crushing endured in His passion, and designated by a three-day sepulchre, about which elsewhere. This is indeed that exalted sea,
[Marginal note: Pſalm.] and southern region, to which God walked after the transgression of the first-formed man had been committed, and through which sea He delights to direct His steps, as is sung in the psalm: *In the sea is your way, and your paths in many waters.* For He more frequently travels the path of mercy and clemency, signified by the sea, than that of justice and punishment. He also fre-
quents the waters of wisdom, in which He made all things and governs all things, by steps indeed not perceived by us; therefore it follows: *And your footsteps will not be known,* because no one has entered into that supreme wisdom, not even Moses himself, with the
[Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] infallible Truth saying: *No one knows the Son,* namely, that supreme wisdom itself, or the water, *except the Father; nor does anyone know the Father, except the Son, and to whom the Son wills to reveal.* God also has a path in this bitter and defiled sea, so that, according to
[Marginal note: Hieron.] Jerome's opinion, as a fountain of life He may vivify all things which, in this salty and poisonous sea, have been enslaved to death without the aid of that life. Nevertheless, this sea must be crossed by us, that we may arrive at the harbor and the
[Marginal note: Paulus] land of the living; as the apostle explains in mystical language, saying: *All crossed the sea; and all were baptized under Moses in the cloud and in the sea.* Since these waters represent those most exalted waters of grace and wisdom, to which we are going, therefore a passage through these lower waters has been enjoined upon us by our leader, as through a sacrament of those, in which we are cleansed and blessed; just as we have in
[Marginal note: Ioan.] the Gospel, which is titled according to John: *Unless one is born again of water and the Holy Spirit, he will not enter into the kingdom of heaven.* For by these sensible waters we are reborn in the sight of men, or in the face of the Church; but in the sight of God we are reborn
[Marginal note: Apocal.] by those waters, about which it is said in the Apocalypse: *In His sight as a sea*

--- Page 416 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 139

glassy, like crystal. From which perhaps some have taken to say that the waters which are above the heaven are the crystalline heaven, which is called the *primum mobile*: A ridiculous thing indeed, since that heaven is fiery, and not watery, or crystalline; and those supercelestial waters, about which we read in many places of scripture, are angels praising God, or the very tribunal of mercy, or the house of wisdom. By which waters both the heavens, which are watery, are irrigated, and souls defiled by their impurities are purified, and all these lower waters receive fruitfulness and life. And when God has judged, due to our demanding sins, to withdraw the irrigation and influx of the superexcellent waters, these lower ones dry up, and sometimes are turned into evil encounters: as our divine John testifies in the Apocalypse, saying: "And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates, and dried up its water." [Ioannes] But the second and third, who had poured out their vials, one into the sea, and the other into the rivers, turned them into deadly blood. And would that the rivers, which ought to gush from our bellies, and the sea, in which we were baptized (thus, by our demanding merits), had not now been turned into blood, which cannot possess the kingdom of God, Or had not been dried up by obstructed high channels: so much so that, dry and parched, those who ought to irrigate the whole earth like rivers, have neither for others nor for themselves even whence to live, burning with great thirst. And would that they do not become like the Babylonians, to whom Jeremiah says: "Behold, I, says the Lord, will judge your cause: I will make the sea a desert, and dry up its spring." [Ierem.] Which happens to all those who are unwilling to hear Him saying: "If anyone thirsts, let him come to me and drink." [CHRISTVS.] But let us pass on to other things.

What are fountains? Chapter XIII.

[Decorative initial N] O much labor is not required of us to declare that God is a fountain, since He Himself proclaims and complains in these words: "They have forsaken me, the Fountain of living waters, the Lord." [Ierem. Dauid] This also the royal prophet and he who was privy to divine secrets have testified: For one says: "With you is the fountain of life." But the other introduces Him saying: "To the thirsty I will give from the fountain of living water freely." [Ioan.] Which fountain (as it says a little further down) sent forth a river proceeding from the throne of God and of the Lamb. But Isaiah testifies that there are many divine fountains, [Isaias.] saying: "With joy you will draw water from the fountains of the Savior." Which fountains are the Father Himself, the first origin of all things, the Son of God Himself, and also the Holy Spirit: And He, although He is fire, nevertheless sometimes takes the name of a fountain or a river. From which John, explaining that word of the highest Truth: "It will become in him a fountain of water springing up into eternal life," says, "But this He spoke concerning the Spirit, which those who believed were to receive." Or fountains are (as Jerome explains) evangelical teachings and divine words, [Hieron.] which wash and purify souls better than the waters of a fountain wash the body, according to that saying of the Savior: "You are clean because of the word which I have spoken to you." Concerning these fountains, the prophet says: "In the churches, bless God the Lord from the fountains of Israel," [CHRISTVS. Dauid] that is, of that universal Israel, concerning whom it is said: "I have not come except..."

S iij

--- Page 417 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

[Marginal note: CHRIST.] to the sheep that had perished of the house of Israel, that house indeed which is the whole collection of the faithful awaiting the word and the water of saving wisdom, as we shall declare elsewhere, with God's favor. But so that we may return to higher fountains, the first fountain and [Marginal note: Canticles. Zechariah.] origin of all good things is the Father, of whom it is said in the Canticles: "A fountain of gardens, and a well of living waters." The Son is also a fountain, of whom Zechariah says: "In that day there shall be a fountain open to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for the washing of the sinner and of the menstruous woman," which all, without controversy, explain concerning Christ and the Son of God. And that the Holy Spirit is a fountain, we have already said. There is also a fountain of wisdom, and the law emanating from the first fountain has itself become a fountain, as [Marginal note: Solomon. Canticles.] Solomon says in Proverbs: "The law of the wise is a fountain of life." And in Canticles: "A garden enclosed, a fountain sealed." For the divine law is indeed a garden planted with every kind of tree, because all doctrine and all discipline are contained within the divine law under a wonderful covering; and therefore it is said that it is an enclosed garden. It is also a fountain sealed with the seal of the living God teaching it, so that it is not without mystery said that the sum of the law, comprised in ten precepts, was written by the finger of God. For neither can so many and so great sacraments, hidden in that law beneath the shell of history, be perceived or conceived by mortals, [Marginal note: David.] unless they are illuminated by divine light, according to that of the Prophet: "Reveal my eyes, and I will consider the wonders of your law." Moreover, a fountain is sometimes a human crea [Marginal note: Esther] ture, as Mordecai said of Esther: "A small fountain, which grew into a river, and overflowed into many waters, is Esther." Also, the Queen of heaven was and is a most exuberant fountain, drawing immediately from the infinite ocean. There are also other fountains: apostles, prophets, and doctors, who offer the people the waters of wisdom and doc [Marginal note: Isaiah. Jerome.] trine, of whom Isaiah says: "He will lead them to fountains of waters," that is, to the teachers of both the Old and New Testaments, as Jerome understands. And again, concerning that: "In that day you shall draw waters with joy from the fountains of the Savior," he says: They shall draw from fountains filled by the Savior, from whose fullness all receive, becoming themselves fountains, not indeed infinite like the divine ones, but filled with their waters. But sometimes (alas!) the fountains have dried up, the supreme fountain withdrawing its influx, [Marginal note: Peter.] of whom Peter says: "These are fountains without water, and clouds agitated by a whirlwind, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved forever," after they delighted in the aridity and dryness of broken cisterns, having abandoned the fountain of living waters, may He continually nourish us by watering us with His clemency.

**What are rivers, or channels. Chapter XIV.**

[Marginal note: Solomon] [Large decorative initial F] That rivers have their origin from the sea is most clearly evident from the testimony of Scripture, Solomon saying in Ecclesiastes: "All rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full, more indeed than it was, or it does not overflow, as our translation has it. To their place the rivers return: and behold, they return to go." For they return to the fountains, so that they may flow again, and they return to the sea, from which they have their origin. In these rivers fish are generated, and from them regions are irrigated, and to

--- Page 418 ---
**TONE SEVEN. 140**

...for navigation, being passable, they are useful to men through various services. Indeed, great are the mysteries of rivers: For the sea and the infinite ocean is God Himself, and fountains are of multiple kinds: but rivers are rational souls emanating from that very sea, and returning to the same. But these elemental rivers flow and reflow with perpetual course and circuit: while those better rivers, signified by these, tend once and for all, and with a single course, to their origin, unless the opinion of the Pythagoreans about the transmigration of souls is true, which the Catholic faith does not admit: [Marginal note: Pythag.] Concerning these rivers, it is sung in the psalm: The floods of the Lord have lifted up, the floods have lifted up their voice: the floods have lifted up their waves. [Marginal note: Psalm.] For neither are the Eridanus, Danube, Tagus, Nile, Euphrates, or Indus called rivers of the Lord, but of lands and regions: nor do they cry out, or lift up their voice. Therefore, these are the rivers of the Lord, endowed with mouth, tongue, ears, eyes, and hands: concerning which it is again said: The rivers shall clap their hands: And their impetus gladdens the city of God, while through the earthly channels of this body they have flowed from the eternal sea to the fountains, from which, still through earthly channels, but openly operating publicly in the body of the world, they return to the sea itself, giving in their passage due fruits: irrigation to the land, generation to fish, and passage to navigators, not suffocation, not inundation of lands, not ruin of buildings: Because those doing this are not called rivers of peace gladdening the city of the Lord, but Babylonian rivers, concerning which it is said in the psalm: By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, and wept: [Marginal note: Psalm.] Because with excessive or disordered impetus they suffocate and destroy: or they are dried up and wither, according to that of Isaiah: And [Marginal note: Isaias] the water shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be wasted and dried up, and the rivers shall fail. The streams of the embankments shall be diminished and dried up, and the bed of the river shall be laid bare from its source: and all irrigated seed shall be dried up. He also pursues many things, all of which it would be long to recount and explain. But these dried-up channels are sometimes refilled with the fire of punishing justice, which causes the rivers of mercy and piety to dry up, which the impious do not deserve to receive. There are also rivers of eloquence, as the adage is now worn out. There are also rivers of wisdom, as it is said in plain language in Ecclesiasticus: [Marginal note: Ecclesia:] I, Wisdom, poured out rivers as a conduit of immense water: I am like a river's diorix, that is, a river of a pool, or a derivation, and not a river dorix, as faulty codices have it: and like an aqueduct I came forth from Paradise, and I said: I will water good plantations, and I will make drunk the fruit of my offspring. And concerning Solomon it is again said: [Marginal note: Idem] He was filled with wisdom as with a river. Job also says concerning one seeking wisdom: [Marginal note: Iob] He has searched the depths of rivers, and brought hidden things to light: Which rivers especially [Marginal note: CHRIST,] flow from a land flowing with milk and honey. They also flow from human earth, if the highest Truth speaks truly, when He says: He who believes in me, rivers of living water shall flow from his belly. And these are the rivers, upon which the spiritual world is ordered, as the royal prophet sings, saying: [Marginal note: David] The earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof, the world, and all who dwell therein: for He has founded it upon the seas, and prepared it upon the rivers. For neither is this world of earthly things,

S iiij

--- Page 419 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

whose Lord is the prince of darkness, is founded upon rivers: but the world
of the Church, and the earth from which truth has arisen, indeed the dwelling place of the saints,
[Paulus] is founded upon rivers, and those foundations about which the apostle says: "You are citizens
of the saints, and members of God's household, built upon the foundation of the apostles
and prophets:" Which are also solid bases of the spiritual edifice, and rivers irrigating
all around: Yet all these rivers derive their power from that greatest river, which (as
we read in Genesis) flowed out of the place of pleasure to water paradise. And behold,
it was divided into four heads: For that river first irrigates the paradise of pleasure through
all its lofty channels, afterwards divided into four heads, brought in by the greatest sacrament
through the four letters of the most sacred name, whose full twelve-fold revolution gives (as we have
said) fruitfulness to all portions of the zodiacal heaven, and to the intelligences presiding
over them, from which they may flow into the lower things contained under those portions,
so that, drawing that water, and being moistened and cleansed, we may return to that very
fount, and the ocean of all graces and pleasures, having completed the due course of our pilgrimage.

**What are pools, lakes, and ponds. Chapter XV.**

[Illuminated initial 'E' containing a figure of a man, possibly a saint or scholar, seated at a desk with a book]
From the sea, springs, rivers, and waters gushing from the bowels
of the earth, sometimes aided by rain, arise ponds, lakes, and pools:
which, however, in sacred scripture are of the greatest difference. A pool,
for example, which among the Hebrews has the name of blessing, is always
auspicious: For ברכה *beraca* signifies both blessing and pool. A lake, however, a name,
as in many cases derived from בור *bor*, which signifies a pit, or a certain place of hell,
is always inauspicious. A pond, however, which in Hebrew is called אגם *agam*,
is sometimes taken in a good sense, sometimes in a bad sense. But ascending
to the better things, which are signified by these lower things, it must be noted:
that a pool, just as it receives water, so also it diffuses it, with no putrefaction
of the waters ever occurring in it. And these are they who communicate the talents
they have received, and profit in blessing, imparting themselves to others, according
to the apostolic saying, where it is said: "I have become all things to all people, that I might gain
[Idem] all for Christ." So also those who communicate the wisdom or doctrine bestowed upon them,
as the highest Truth teaches: "Freely you have received, freely give." And of these speaks
[CHRI STVS.] the Wise Man, who [Salomon] communicated that wisdom which he received by divine gift, teaching and writing.
"I built for myself," he says, "pools of water, to irrigate a forest of growing trees."
But this is the lower pool, of which Isaiah says: "You gathered the waters of the
[Isaias] lower pool." There is also a higher and exalted pool, of which in the same Isaiah
[Idem] God speaks, saying: "Go out to meet Ahaz, you and your son Shear-Jashub,
at the end of the conduit of the upper pool, on the road, or the beaten path of the fuller's field."
Which words are full of mysteries: For Isaiah was commanded to go out to meet
Ahaz, against whom the king of Syria and the king of Israel had risen up, as if
to bring him help and favor from God's benevolence, which from that

--- Page 420 ---
**VOLUME SEVEN.** [Page number] **141**

emanates from the superior pool: and therefore it is said that it comes to the pool. And it was right to lead him, who had been left, his son Jasub, who is interpreted as 'repenting' or 'returning to God,' as one worthy to receive the gift of blessing and the water of that pool. Nor is it devoid of mystery that the prophet was commanded to come to the end of the aqueduct, or embankment, or channel of the superior pool: For this is the vessel and channel of this corporeal mass to be sanctified in us, so that it may descend to it as to a clean and prepared riverbed, and through it the water of that supreme pool may flow, and in it, as in a dwelling, where it ought then to abide: For the body itself is the temple of the soul: and this is the seat of God: as the apostle says: "You are the temple of God." [Marginal note: Paul] Into which the spirit enters and exits so secretly that no one knows whence it comes or whither it goes, or when it inhabits or departs, except the spirit itself, and the Son of God who comes with it, and the Eternal Father, as Truth itself testifies, saying: "We will come to him and make our dwelling with him." [Marginal note: CHRIST] But one becomes a worthy channel of divine water when, having returned and been directed to God, he abandons sins, puts concupiscence to flight, and grinds, presses, and tramples the fuel of his flesh: and washes himself as if cleansing clothes. And this is what is said: "In the way, or trodden path of the fuller's field," מסלה, for Mesilat, for which our translation has 'paved way,' signifies trodden and worn by feet, and cleansed with stones. To the same place we read in the fourth book of Kings that Hezekiah came, when Rabshakeh, sent by the king of the Assyrians, went to him to reproach and threaten the king and the people of Jerusalem: so that he too, as a true penitent, might merit the water of grace and blessing from God: which he also earned: for he was delivered from the hand of the king of the Assyrians, with one hundred eighty-five thousand of his soldiers struck down in the camp. [Marginal note: Kings] Therefore, the superior pool is divine blessing offering all good things: but the inferior pool is the blessing of the saints imparting to us, in proportion to what they have received from the superior pool to be communicated. There is also a pool for washing, of which our John makes mention, saying: "Now there is in Jerusalem the Sheep Gate pool, where the sheep to be offered in the temple of the Lord were washed:" [Marginal note: John] because one who is defiled and not washed cannot enter the true temple of the Lord, according to the Lord's word: "Unless I wash you, you will have no part with me," [Marginal note: CHRIST] just as it is also said through Isaiah: "Everyone whose name is written in the book of life in Jerusalem will be called holy:" [Marginal note: Isaiah] And this, if the Lord washes away the filth of the daughters of Zion, For although the sheep are to be placed at the right hand of the judge, and although their names are written in the book of life, nevertheless it is necessary that they be washed, certainly in that pool of which it is said in the psalm: "Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity." [Marginal note: Psalm] And in Ezekiel: "I washed you with water and cleansed you." [Marginal note: Ezekiel] In which pool also there is blood, washing better than water, of which it is said in the Apocalypse: "He washed us from our sins in his own blood." [Marginal note: Revelation. Ibid.] And again at the end of the vision it says: "Blessed are those who wash their robes in the blood of the Lamb, so that they may have the right to the tree of life and may enter the city through the gates." And sometimes this pool within ourselves, with God's favor, S v.

--- Page 421 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

conſtructam habemus, quādo uidelicet tacti à Deo uenimus ad lachrymas, quæ
[Marginal note: Canti.] abluūt delicta, iuxta illud Canticorū: Oculi tui ſicut piſcinæ Hesbō: Hesbō enim
[Marginal note: Ezechi.] cogitationē ſignificat, illā utiq;, de qua dicebat Ezechias: Recogitabo tibi omnes
annos meos in amaritudine animæ meæ. Ex qua recogitatione fluunt lachrymæ
[Marginal note: Dauid] abluentes: ut dicebat regius propheta: Lauabo per ſingulos noctes lectum meū,
lachrymis meis ſtratum meum rigabo. Bona eſt itaque piſcina, ſed lacus, in qui-
bus putreſcit aqua, & moritur, infauſtus eſt: ut pleriſq; locis ſcriptura p-
[Marginal note: Apocal.] bare poſſumus: Nam de botris terrenæ uineæ in Apocalypſi legimus, quòd uinde
miati miſſi ſunt in lacum iræ Dei magnum. Et in Trenis ait Ieremias deplorans
[Marginal note: Ierem.] præuaricatricem Ieroſolymam: Poſuerunt in lacum uit

--- Page 422 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 142**

**What the Red Sea is. Chapter XVI.**

[Decorative initial M in a square frame with foliage] The Red Sea is not without reason so celebrated in sacred writings, because *Yam Suph*, that is, *suph*, truly signifies a finite sea, or a marshy sea: For God alone is the infinite sea. But other seas, lakes, and pools are finite, determined, and disturbed, or are rendered marshy and muddy, permeated by saltiness, or by earth and mud. And these are the seas we must cross, along with the adjacent desert, so that at last, having passed through hills and mountains, we may reach that clear and most sweet sea, from which true milk and honey continuously flows,
leaving Pharaoh, that is, the destroyer and shaker, with his Egyptians: who are interpreted as distress, or those who cause distress: and they are in that very marsh, which is formed from the mixing of water with earth: From which it becomes marshy, and in many places, a reed-bed: as we have that text well interpreted, when Moses' mother placed her son in the reed-bed on the river bank, where in Hebrew it has *b'suph* (בסוף), which elsewhere we have interpreted as red: and together with *yam*, which signifies sea, it is interpreted as the Red Sea. Yet this reed-bed is not that Red or marshy sea, which is called the Arabian Gulf, crossed by the Israelite people, since it is far from the royal city by a long journey. Therefore, by *Zuph*, it is well interpreted as a reed-bed, or marshy, where (alas, wretched us) we are all placed together with Moses, when, emanating from that most clear and immense sea, we enter this bodily prison, destined to return again to the same supreme ocean. Therefore, we must make a passage through this narrow and marshy sea, but indeed, this one is split: so that we may obtain a free passage, leaving its inhabitants to be enveloped in that mud, and with their most stubborn leader, to be overwhelmed by their marsh, in whose mire they were entangled.

After crossing this sea, the true Pasch, that is, the true passage, with God as our leader, must be celebrated by us with the greatest solemnity, and with the Psalmist it must be said: We have sinned [Dauid] with our fathers, we have acted wickedly, we have committed impiety, while we dwelt in Egypt, in the marshy sea, in the dry land, and in the desert. Our fathers in Egypt did not understand your wonders, nor were they mindful of the multitude of your mercy: Nor do we understand the work which you continuously perform with us, leading us out of this muddy ocean. They provoked, or (to speak more truly to the letter) rebelled against the Red, or marshy, sea: and we rebel in this bodily marsh, which is the cause and incitement of all rebellion. They deservedly praised the great four-letter name, in which they were saved: and we ought to praise the name of Jesus, in whom alone (says Peter) [Petrus.] we must be saved: and in whom the power of that great four-letter name is contained. Therefore, in this struggle with the sea, and the Egyptians, with the dry land, and enemies of many kinds, our Creator has placed us, so that he might make known his power among the peoples, freeing us from manifold snares. And he does this by rebuking this marshy sea of our body, and by teaching us to mortify it, so that it may be dried up from all softening moisture; and foul-

--- Page 423 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...defiled by mud, leading us through its dry land, and through the desert of penance more happily than through soft luxuries: Those who flee these, and live austerely in solitude, and in [Marginal note: David] that very desert of penance, are saved: as the prophet adds: "And He saved them from the hand of those who hated them, and redeemed them from the hand of their enemies," who easily succumb in battle against the austere, but conquer against the soft. But those who rashly presume to cross it, trusting in their own virtue, entangling themselves in that marsh, are suffocated, as it is written of the Egyptians: "He enveloped the horse and its rider in the sea," that is, He permitted them to be enveloped, instead of which we have "He cast them out." Whence it follows: "and the waters covered those who troubled them: not one of them remained." This, therefore, is the sea which all those [Marginal note: Paul] fathers (according to the Apostle's opinion) crossed in the cloud and in the sea, namely, being baptized in the highest sense: Which we all also must cross, if we wish to reach the harbor of salvation.

**What are clouds, and rain. Chapter XVII.**
[Large decorative initial D containing a landscape scene] **T**WO benefits are conferred upon us by clouds: One is covering; the other is rain: and both mitigate the sun's intensity: For its excessively excellent light strikes eyes that are less prepared, or not accustomed to such great light: and its drying and scorching heat sometimes burns: Yet both are necessary: For the tempering of these, the highest regulator commands clouds to be interposed for a time, which may suppress the light, and moisten what is dried, and sprinkle it. No less do those better clouds, of which these are a likeness, interpose themselves as veils, when the weak eyes of mortals cannot gaze upon the glory and splendor of the Creator, who is indeed the true sun: Into which [Marginal note: Plotinus] most brilliant spectacle (says Plotinus), if an eye infected with impurities, not yet purified, or weak from idleness, attempts to gaze, it will immediately be blinded, and discern nothing. Therefore, lest eyes thus infected be offended, a cloud is interposed: just as to the murmuring people the [Marginal note: Exodus] glory of the Lord appeared in a cloud, as we read in Exodus. And again: "I will come to you in the thick cloud, so that the people may hear me speaking to you." So also, when Moses ascended to the Lord to the top of the mountain, a cloud covered the mountain, lest common eyes gazing upon the glory of the Lord, which was like a burning fire [Marginal note: Ezekiel] upon the top of the mountain, should be offended. And speaking to Ezekiel, He filled the court and the house, where they were, with a cloud [Marginal note: Kings]. So also in the third book of Kings we read that God, speaking to Solomon in the temple, lest His glory appearing there should offend squinting eyes, filled the temple and the house with mist. In this way, therefore, God presents Himself to inferiors [Marginal note: Psalm.], as it is sung in the psalm: "Clouds and thick darkness are around Him." Which He also observed with the apostles, for when He appeared glorious to them, He sent a cloud before, which might overshadow them, lest their still weak eyes should be offended by the splendor of His glory shining like the sun. Another benefit is that just as we are cooled in body by the covering of clouds when the sun grows strong, so also when the heat of divine wrath rages upon dried-up souls without heavenly dew, the most merciful [Marginal note: Isaiah] judge protects them with a cloud of clemency, just as He speaks through Isaiah to a scattered and parched nation.

--- Page 424 ---
**SEVENTH TONE.**
                                                                            143
saying: I will be like a cloud of dew in the day of harvest. Moistened by this dew, and protected
by a cloud, we become such that in us that passage of the same Isaiah may have its place: “Drop down, ye heavens, from above,”
                                                                                                        Isaias
and let the clouds pour down the just, or righteousness, as the Hebrew truth has it, that is,
let that heavenly irrigation and rain be made just, receiving that of which it is said
in the psalm: “Thou, O God, shalt separate a voluntary rain for thy inheritance,”
                                                                                                        Psalmus
which was weakened by sin: But Thou hast perfected it with the rain of mercy, grace, and
all good things: which are scattered by sin, and punitive justice proceeding
from the north, from which all evil is spread open, or revealed, upon the inhabitants
of the earth. And this is what the same prophet had said before: “You have placed the land in your fornications,”
                                                                                                        Prophet:
and your evils: therefore the drops of rain have been withheld. And if clouds
(as in most cases) are beneficial, yet sometimes thin ones lightly dissolve
into a breeze: and sometimes they are harmful. Of the former, Job says: “He has taken away my desire as a wind,”
                                                                                                        Job
and “my salvation has passed away like a cloud.” And concerning those who live like beasts,
and have received divine irrigation in vain, Thaddaeus says: “These, feasting
                                                                                                        Thadde.
together without fear, feeding themselves, are clouds without water, which by the wind
are carried about.” And in Hosea, such are called morning clouds passing
                                                                                                        Hosea.
without any fruit upon the earth: and would that it were without great detriment to themselves,
after they have received their soul in vain. Therefore, they sometimes become harmful
to themselves and to others, when from what they have received, they not only do not profit, but
abuse it to their destruction: so that the mist, which they received for their advancement, turns for them
into detriment, as it is said in Joel: “The inhabitants of the earth shall be troubled, because
                                                                                                        Joel.
the day of darkness and gloom is near, a day of mist and thick darkness,” so
dense that it does not offer a slight obstruction, but a dark one, and miserable shadows.
And sometimes it is so compacted that it is opposed like a wall, lest any access
between God and us be made, as Jeremiah says in Lamentations: “Thou hast opposed a cloud
                                                                                                        Jerem.
to Thyself, that prayer may not pass through.” And there Jerome says: “A cloud opposed to prayer is seen,
                                                                                                        Hiero.
when the mind is enveloped in a certain darkness and cloud of blindness, lest it deserve to be illuminated by the ray of divine
contemplation.” There are also better clouds, in which God is said to dwell,
as we read in Mark, that a voice came from the cloud. And a cloud received Christ ascending
                                                                                                        Mark.
from the eyes of the disciples, as Luke testifies. And also
                                                                                                        Luke.
John saw one like the Son of Man sitting upon a cloud in his most famous vision.
                                                                                                        John.
Knowing this, David says: “Who makest the clouds thy chariot,” or “thy tribunal:”
                                                                                                        David
and better, as the literal truth has it. But all these things are said for us,
who cannot behold and ascend that inaccessible light, which
God himself inhabits. Hence His glory, or He himself sitting in His glory, is like
a cloud for those unable to gaze upon it due to weakness of sight, until it will be given
to see Him face to face, as He is.

--- Page 425 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**
**What Dew and Frost Are. Chapter 18.**

[Large decorative initial P depicting a figure, possibly a scholar or saint, seated at a desk with a book] Dew and frost descend from the sky in clear weather, but with a very great difference: For the former is pure, fertile, blessed, and always beneficial; but the latter is ill-omened and harmful, descending with very great cold, and when things are dried up and rivers fail. And it is indeed surprising that the former (dew) nourishes, but the latter, wintry, dries up and burns plants, and in a way consumes the very earth. For thus from the same sky proceeds benefit and harm: For by the sun mud is hardened, and wax melts according to the varied disposition of the recipient. From the most beneficent Christ some received benefit, others harm, according to Simeon's prophecy: "Behold, this one is appointed for the fall and rising of many in Israel." Finally, from the best God proceeds both good and evil, as Isaiah says: "I am he who makes good and creates evil, making lig..."
[marginal note: h:]
[marginal note: Simeon]
[marginal note: Isaias]

--- Page 426 ---
VOLUME SEVEN. 144

Open my eyes, and I will consider wonderful things from your law. And again: [Marginal note: David]
Your knowledge has become wonderful, that is, of your words, from me, but rather it has been
elevated above me, and I will not be able to attain to it. Therefore, deservedly, the
knowledge and understanding of these divine words is called the bread of the strong:
because even if they present themselves as familiar to all in their outward appearance,
they nevertheless contain a marrow to be gnawed only by the strongest teeth.
They are also called by the same prophet the Dew of Hermon, which descends upon [Marginal note: The same.]
Mount Sion. For this divine word, "ros" (dew), is anathematized (as Jerome [Marginal note: Jerome]
thinks) by the Hebrews: thus Hermon is never interpreted [in that problematic sense].
But descending upon Mount Sion, that is, upon the Church and men gathered in the Holy Spirit.
For this is indeed the Church, not a building, or a possession of prebends, or a dominion
of temporal things. And since through this dew God gives us fertility, food, and
life, therefore it follows: For the Lord has commanded blessing there, and life
forever. How, however, when, and to whom God distributed the dew of His
word, was declared to Gideon by a beautiful mystery, to whom a sign was first given
of dew falling upon a fleece while the ground remained untouched, when afterwards the dew
fell upon the ground with the fleece dry: For the divine words first fell upon the Israelite
people, the nation denoted by the ground remaining dry: afterwards they were spread
among the Gentiles, the Jews and Israelites being left in dryness, as Paul and Barnabas
(as is found in the apostolic acts) publicly and with a constant voice declared to the Jews, saying: [Marginal note: Paul Barnabas]
"It was necessary to speak the word of God to you first, but since you rejected it, and
judged yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold, we turn to the Gentiles, as the Lord
commanded us: 'I have set you (He says) as a light to the Gentiles, that you may be for
salvation to the ends of the earth.'" Hearing this, the Gentiles rejoiced, and glorified the
word of God. Therefore, by a great mystery, Isaac, full of the Holy Spirit, first blessed
Jacob with the dew of heaven, and with the fatness of the earth moistened by that dew:
Afterwards, raised in an ecstasy of mind, foreseeing what was to come, he imparted
the same blessing of dew to Esau, who should someday shake off the yoke of servitude
from his neck, and be led to Christ, and be filled with heavenly dew. The divine
word is also a channel, a case, and a sheath of divinity, just as, נדן, *tal* (which signifies dew),
is the sheath of the most sacred four-letter name, so that we may reveal something of the secrets
of the recondite theology of the Hebrews. And although the word of God is published [Marginal note: Hebrew Theology.]
everywhere, even to peasants and common folk: and its sounding voice reaches the ears of all,
yet its sense and taste, which are dew and manna, are spread to very few, because it is
denied to all unworthy ones, as the Lord says through the prophet Haggai: "Because my house [Marginal note: Haggai]
is deserted," that is, divine worship, "and everyone hastens to his own house, seeking
what is his own, and not what is God's," "because of this, the heavens were forbidden,"
that is, heavenly men, "from giving dew: and the earth," that is, the unworthy people,
"from giving its produce." "And I called for a drought upon the land, upon the mountains,
and finally upon the works of the hands of those men who do not care for what is God's."
And the royal prophet, knowing that dew was withheld by God's severe justice,
said concerning the mountains, in which from [Marginal note: David]

--- Page 427 ---
CANTICLE THE FIRST

by this Saul was punished: "Mountains of Gilboa, let neither dew nor rain come upon you." Thus,
while we provoke the very justice of God against us with our wickedness, our land
has dried up, and, infertile due to withheld dew and rain, cannot give its fruit:
because it does not receive blessing through rain and dew from that supreme fount:
May the Lord send it down upon us by His kindness, so that we may say with the prophet:
Psalm. "Indeed, the Lord will give kindness, and our land will give its fruit."
What about hail and snow. Chapter XIX.

[Large initial letter S]
The supreme and just judge, and although He has prepared many good things in favor of the good,
yet He has also established some things for the punishment of evildoers,
Ecclesia. some of which are enumerated in Ecclesiasticus, where it is said: "Fire, hail,
famine, and death, all these were created for vengeance." And concerning fire,
CHRI
STVS. not cherishing, but tormenting, the Judge Himself threatens that He will say to those to be punished: "Depart,
you cursed, into eternal fire, which has been prepared for the devil and his angels: so that..."

--- Page 428 ---
**VOLUME SEVEN. 145**

T
hat piety might be diffused into our apostolic ancestors, and that we might be inflamed with the love of Christ, who suffered so many and such great things for us. Hence greater is the sin of Christian priests, teachers, and leading men, who in the multitude of benefits rather become frozen into most savage hail, and provoke the hail of punishing justice, as we read happened to the Egyptians in Exodus and likewise in the psalm: [Marginal note: Psalmi] "And he killed their vines with hail, and their mulberry trees with frost: And he delivered their cattle to the hail, and their flocks to coals of fire." Afterwards, he raged against the five kings of the Canaanites, and their army in Gibeon, as it is written in the book of Joshua, where it is said: [Marginal note: Iosue] "Far more died by hailstones than those whom the children of Israel struck with the sword:" because far more perish from ingratitude, and their own malice, by which the water of graces is frozen into hail, and into their own ruin, than those whom pursuing enemies kill. For sin has it that it is a punishment to the perpetrator, and by its own weight it draws to something else, and brings on God's wrath, and punishment, and lack of charisms, as the Lord speaks in Haggai, saying: [Marginal note: Agge] "I struck you with scorching wind, blight, and hail, and all the works of your hands:" But better according to the truth of the letter: "I struck you with drying up, drought, and hail:" For 'aurigo' is the royal disease (jaundice), doing nothing to the purpose. And thus, wherever mention is made of hail in sacred scripture, you will undoubtedly find it to have been brought forth for vengeance. But those who are less powerful, and less hardened in evil, are compared to small hailstones, and they, that is, come to be punished with a milder vengeance.

Snow, however, which is a soft and gentle coagulation of water like wool, is not read to be given for destruction, nor is it harmful unless it is frozen more strongly; indeed, it is often beneficial, providing nourishment to sown wheat: and it is adorned with such whiteness, that even spiritual things to be whitened are compared to it, as it is found in the psalm: [Marginal note: Psalmus] "You will wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow." And again: "They shall be whitened with snow in Salmon." And in Isaiah: [Marginal note: Isaias] "If your sins are red as scarlet, and as crimson, they shall be whitened like snow." Also in the Gospel [Marginal note: Euange.] we read that the garments of Christ, when transfigured, became white as snow. And in Revelation, [Marginal note: Apocal.] the hairs of him who was clothed in a long garment are said to be white like snow. Also, those Nazirites in Lamentations [Marginal note: Treno.] are said to be whiter than snow, although the whiteness of spiritual things is purer than the whiteness of snow, even though snow itself holds the highest degree of whiteness among corporeal things. To this (snow) also, as something auspicious, Solomon in Proverbs [Marginal note: Salomon] equates happy things, saying: "As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful messenger to him who sent him, for he refreshes the soul of his master." This is brought forth for the Easterners, who are accustomed to keep snow as a faithful guardian of the gift which the highest provider has bestowed upon them, so that in summer and at harvest time they may somewhat cool the sun's fires, and temper their burning limbs, so that they may rest from that fiery agitation. Thus a faithful messenger tempers the anxious cares of his prince: Which also held true for the evangelical speakers, who were sent to that harvest, concerning which the Lord said: "The harvest indeed is plentiful, but the laborers are few:" From which returning, seventy-two faithful messengers (as

--- Page 429 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

(Luke narrates) with joy about the work done in the harvest, and the prince who had sent them also rejoiced, whence it follows: "In that hour he rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, saying: I confess to you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth," and the rest that follows. Behold how much the Lord was refreshed by the faithful execution of the messengers whom he had sent. Moreover, snow is cold, but its cold, which is preserved in straw filled with good tempering, indeed, rather tending towards warmth, is not a cold that expels the warmth of charity, but rather one that restrains the ardor of concupiscence: and it is cherished by the garment of twofold love, or the charity of God and neighbor, according to that saying of the Wise Man in Proverbs: "She will not fear for her house from the cold of snow, for all her household are clothed with double garments," that is, supported by both charity, or by a good mind and good work simultaneously, as Jerome touches upon in his commentaries. If, however, snow dissolves into water not boiled by fire, it harms: Similarly, if this cold, and the zeal of chastity, dissolves into the flowing water of worldly glory, and not boiled by the fire of the Holy Spirit and divine love, it harms, and condemns, and causes one to return to a greater ardor of concupiscence, according to that saying of Job: "They will pass from the waters of snow to excessive heat." Snow, therefore, is the zeal of good works, which suppresses the ardor of evil concupiscence; let it burn for God and for neighbor, and let it shine with the whiteness of good example, and grow white with purity. Frost, however, since it is frozen snow, indeed signifies those who receive the word of God hard as a rock, whence the power of the divine word itself is frozen for them. And concerning such it is said in the Gospel, where the seed of the word of God is discussed: "Another fell upon a rock, and when it grew, it withered away, because it had no moisture," the power of the divine word being frozen by the hardness of the receiver, so much so that it bears no fruit in them.
[Marginal note: Hiero.]
[Marginal note: Iob]
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]

**What is ice and crystal. Chapter XX.**

[Marginal note: Sapien.]
<G> Ice and crystal, no doubt, are frozen water, but they differ, because ice is of very easy dissolution, as it is said in the book of Wisdom: "It was easily dissolved like ice." Crystal, however, is so compacted, that with its porosities completely emptied and removed, it can no longer admit heat internally so as to be dissolved. And these too are stored in the treasury of the Lord, and are commemorated in sacred writings by a mysterious type, and are invited to the praise of the Creator by those boys sprinkled with divine dew in the burning furnace: "Bless the Lord, ice and snow:" because they themselves also do his word, and execute the command of the prince. But let us come to man, for whom all things were made, and for whom all these things are commemorated. Ice holds the image of the sinner, for whom the water of divine benevolence is frozen by the cold of sin, and by the north wind, whence all evil is spread and revealed, as it is said in Ecclesiasticus: "The cold north wind blew, and the crystal froze from the waters." But would that this frozen water, transcending the limits of ice, not turn into crystal, so compacted and compressed within itself, that it cannot admit God as a guest, and a stranger...

--- Page 430 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 146

...foreign heat, nor be dissolved, unless there is a virtue exceeding all the power of nature. However, human ice is resolved by the heat of serene and pure love for God and neighbor, as we read in the same Ecclesiasticus: "As ice in the clear sky, so shall your sins be melted away." [Marginal note: Ecclesia.] But crystal, even if it requires greater strength, yet lest those frozen in the abyss of sins despair, the prophet, full of the Holy Spirit, [Marginal note: David] comforts them, foretelling those things which the Word and the Holy Spirit themselves, sent by the Father, will do for the restoration of the heavenly Jerusalem, saying: "He sends his crystal like a morsel, which is very porous and receives a foreign moisture, making it wet." And wondering whence this happens, which nature cannot do, the prophet himself adds: "Before the face of its cold, namely the crystal's, who shall stand, able to dissolve it?" But immediately, illuminated by holy light, he added: "He will send his word, and will melt it; his spirit will blow, and the waters of tears will flow, and floods of graces into the place of sin, according to that of the Apostle: 'Where iniquity abounded, grace also superabounded.'" But let us pass on to better things.

What is the paradise of delight. Chapter XXI.

[Decorative woodcut initial L] A broad field of discourse has indeed been offered to us: But because those things which pertain to that garden of delights and place of happiness lie deeply hidden from human senses, therefore the Wise describer of it, Moses, [Marginal note: Moses] touched upon a few things under metaphors, always hinting at an anagogical sense, since that garden is not terrestrial (as is commonly said) but celestial and divine, planted by the heavenly farmer and supreme artisan, not indeed in this fertile earth, but in the land of the living, figured by that promised land, of which it is said: "You brought a vine out of Egypt; you cast out the nations and planted it; and you [Marginal note: Psalm.] planted its roots, and it filled the land." And lest anyone be deceived into believing that he was speaking of this crude earth, a little further down he adds: "Visit this vine, and perfect it, which your right hand has planted, and over the son whom you have strengthened, or confirmed for yourself." Behold how clearly it hints that that better vine, and consequently all the trees of the sacred garden, are planted in the Son and in the divine Word, which says: "If anyone does not abide in me, he will be cast out like a branch and will wither, and they will [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] throw him into the fire and he burns." And so that we may open something of the hidden mysteries beneath the veil of history, we will briefly touch upon a few things (lest pearls be exposed to the unworthy). For in the Word and Son of God, not only trees, but all things are planted and founded, as John says: "What was made in him was life." With him Paul says: "Upholding all things by the word of his power." Which is also called the book of life by the divine composer: "And in your book all will be written." For there all are described under images and eternal exemplars: But he himself, with all things contained in him, is in the Father: And therefore we are also planted in the Father, in whom he himself is, who says: "As you, Father, are in me, and I [Marginal note: Idem] in you, and they are one in us." Hence we said above that the garden is planted in the Father, since it is planted in the Son, who is from the Father, and from whom (as he himself confesses) all things have been received.

--- Page 431 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...ceived. And in these are true delights and pleasures, whence it is rightly called paradise, or a garden of delights irrigated by that river of pleasure, of which the divine psalmist says: "They shall be inebriated by the abundance of Your house, and You shall give them to drink from the torrent of Your pleasure," from the fountain, namely, of which it follows: "For with You is the fountain of life." This garden is therefore planted with all trees most beautiful to behold, and most sweet to taste, since all things contained in it are beautiful and pleasant, especially rational minds, which bear His image, although plunged into this bodily mire they may be defiled, yet they may emerge from it more beautiful.

In this paradise not only man, but also an angel was placed, as Ezechiel speaks to the cherubic prince of Tyre, or Assur (who was not a man, but an angel, as Origen says; or a certain strength [Hiero. Ezechi.] of Tyre, as Jerome thinks) saying: "You are the seal of likeness:" Towards which perfect likeness man also strives to attain, when we shall be like Him [Idem.], seeing Him face to face: as He is. Then we too shall be in those delights, in which the cherub had been, of whom the prophet continues: "You were perfect in wisdom, and full of beauty in the delights of paradise." And this until iniquity was found in him, because then it was said to him: "Your inner parts were filled with iniquity, you sinned, and I cast you out from the holy mountain of God: I destroyed you, O cherub:" For the discourse is not directed to him who is placed to guard the tree of life, because this one is one of the cherubim placed above the propitiatory, whence the remission of sins was expected: Which is denoted by that turning sword in the hand of the cherub guarding the tree of life: For man must be turned from creature to God through true repentance, which is called *teshuvah* in Hebrew, and *versio* (turning) in Latin, if he wishes to return to the paradise of delights, just as he had been cast out by turning away from God, and by conversion or (as we better say) by falling towards the creature, and by his fall, just as it is said of another transgressing prince: "You have fallen, Lucifer, who rose in the morning," [Isaias] or as the truth of the letter has it, "How have you fallen, O howling son of the dawn?" as Jerome [Hieron.] asserts in his commentaries, that that word הילל (*heylel*) comes from ילל (*yalal*), which is an interjection, or a verb of lamenting, just as a little earlier, "Howl, for the day of the Lord is near," has הילילו (*heylilu*). And indeed, it was right for him to howl, when he was cast out from all manner of pleasure to all manner of calamity. It follows: "You are broken to the ground, who wounded the nations." For envy was the beginning of his sin, by which, envying [Sapien.] man who was to be exalted, he tried to destroy him, as it is said in the book of Wisdom: "Through envy death entered the world." Therefore, man was granted a return to paradise itself, because, deceived by some ignorance, and drawn by fragility, he fell. But he, enveloped by no ignorance, nor surrounded by the fragility of the flesh, sinned by his own malice with an unforgivable sin, and entirely against the Holy Spirit. A return, however, is given to us through repentance, and turning back to God, and to the place of delights figured by that land flowing with milk and honey: And the return is figured in that Israelite people, who were first oppressed in Egypt with great suffering for many years under the burdens of mud, and bricks, and carrying

--- Page 432 ---
TONUS SEPTIMUS. 147

the manifold pressure which we suffer in this bodily mass, especially while we strive to return to God: And we must pass through a muddy and marshy sea, as we said a little earlier. The vine, therefore, brought out of Egypt is the entire number of those to be saved, who are to be led into the true land of promise, and into the land of the living, from which the nations were cast out, concerning whom it is said in the Apocalypse: The great dragon was cast out, [Marginal note: Apocal.] that ancient serpent, who is the devil and Satan: and his angels were cast out with him, nor was their place found any more in heaven. The elect, however, have been replanted, just as material and vegetative plants are transplanted so that they may produce better: For those who were planted in the Word from eternity, were afterwards transplanted into the Messiah, as He Himself clearly testifies, saying: Just as [Marginal note: CHRISTUS.] a branch cannot bear fruit of itself unless it remains in the vine, so neither can you unless you remain in me: For I have chosen you, and placed you in my garden, so that you may go and bear fruit, and that your fruit may remain, and that you may never be cast out of the garden. And this is the garden, or vineyard, concerning which He says again: Go also into my vineyard, [Marginal note: Idem] so that you may work by my grace, just as the first man was placed to work that righteousness, and the light given from the beginning, but lost through sin. And although God the Son is the garden and the vineyard, He is also the tree of life, because He grants life to all: and he who believes in Him does not perish, but has eternal life. He is also the bread of life, as He Himself testifies, saying: I am the living bread who came down from heaven; if anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. Therefore, He is the fountain of life, the tree of life, the bread of life, and life itself. He is also the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, according to what was said above and what will be said below: Which the Devil envied, and by his persuasion, the first man also envied, believing he could obtain a rank granted to no one, and specifically denied to him, when he was forbidden to eat from that tree, as some well interpret that word of Jonah, who bears the type of Christ (by His own testimony), [Marginal note: Ionas] "because of me this tempest has come," indeed, in angels and men: since both presumed to claim that rank for themselves, from which they were cast out. Therefore, paradise of delight is a place and dwelling in the archetype, furnished with all delights, where there are the ranks of all creatures, and in the midst of all, Christ as the tree and fountain of life, and most full of all good things, from whose fullness all receive: Into which the first man was introduced, and all the angels: And after the rebels were expelled, some faithful ones were at some point introduced, to whom access was given to the innermost chambers of the Most High King, as is the common opinion concerning Enoch and Elijah. Nor is it otherwise to be thought concerning Moses, Abraham, and many prophets. To whom the secrets of the Most High God were so revealed that some of them boast that they saw God the King face to face, and Christ, whom they preached would come in many ways. Nor is it less to be considered concerning the intimates of Christ Himself, already destined by the Father for the world, to whom He Himself said: I am the door: [Marginal note: CHRISTUS.] If anyone enters through me, he will be saved: and he will go in and go out, that is, at will into paradise itself of delight: Which is not terrestrial (as is commonly said), but was planted before the creation of the world, as he rightly believes
T iij

--- Page 433 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

**Jerome.** Jerome, who in Genesis, word for word, says: For "paradise" the text has גן עדן (Gan Eden).
**Symmachus.** Gan Abeden, that is, "garden of delights": For which Symmachus translated "flourishing paradise".
**Aquila.** Likewise, what follows "towards the east" in Hebrew מקדם (mikedem): which Aquila rendered ἀπὸ ἀρχῆς (from the beginning).
**Symmachus.** And we can say "from the beginning": Symmachus indeed (rendered it) ἐκ πρώτης (from the first).
**Theodotion.** And Theodotion ἐν πρώτοις (in the first things). Which itself signifies not "east," but "beginning." From which it is most clearly proven that before God made heaven and earth, He had already founded paradise. Thus far Jerome, whom I have cited word for word, lest some, deceived by misuse, should think me to be dreaming when I have said that that paradise is not terrestrial, as is said by scholars, but celestial, indeed divine, into which entrance is given when man, turned away from sin and created things, returns to God with a whole and pure heart: For then he sees God, acquires understanding, possesses the kingdom of heaven, which is within us: and delights in that very paradise. All of which (unless I am mistaken, nor do I think I am mistaken) are the same thing. And this is the turning sword, which the cherub holds for the guarding of paradise itself, namely, turning away: Which if it is from God towards creatures, then it thus expelled the one turned away from the tree of life and from the delights of paradise itself. But if this turning away is from sins and creatures towards God, then through the cherub one obtains remission and return to the same paradise from which he had been expelled. And for this reason, the cherubim were commanded to be placed upon the cover of the ark of the covenant, which was called the propitiatory (mercy seat), because from there propitiations and remissions of sins were made: Which cherub, for many reasons, prefigures Christ, in whom true propitiation and remission of sins was made. And the twin cherub indicates the twofold nature of the same Christ. I omit many things which could be adduced in corroboration of this opinion through the numerical values of Hebrew letters and their interpretation, lest they seem strange and fictitious to those unaccustomed and not having the rudiments of that study: But since insistence is made with the description of the rivers flowing out from there, since they seem to flow through this habitable earth and to have their origin from a terrestrial place, let us therefore see what the rivers themselves signify.

**What Gihon, Pishon, Tigris, and Euphrates flowing from paradise itself signify. Chapter XXII.**

[Large decorative initial 'A' featuring a landscape with a building]
From that fountain of paradise, water is said to emanate, or a river, which immediately divides into four heads: Which, if we wish to understand according to the true sense, we will remember that from that divine fountain of life flows water, namely the essence and being of all things, which by its first division is divided into four elements as into the principal and primary material principles of things: Which river of essence flowed out from delight, that is, from the most blessed Godhead, to irrigate and pervade the entire earth, that is, matter: which, when first produced, was called earth. And it is well said to be divided in its first course into four heads, namely into four elements, with which the names of the rivers also agree: For the name of one is Pishon (פישון), which some interpret as "revolution of the mouth": But it would be better to say "mouth" and "dentition" from שן (shen), which is "tooth": lest we think it changed from שן, i.e., "sana" (healthy), by way of derivation. Hence it also indicates the earth, of which it is said,

--- Page 434 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 148

¶ it circles all the land of Havilah, which they interpret as 'bringing forth' [or 'parturition'], because the land of Havilah, that is, fertile and fruitful, is surrounded by an arid shore, from which, by those words, both lands are expressed: the arid and the fruitful. And rightly is the earth first expressed as arid, since it is said in Genesis: 'And God called the dry land Earth.' [Marginal note: Genesi] Which would thus remain arid, unless it were irrigated by that river flowing out of the paradise of delight to irrigate (as the text states) the whole earth. Therefore, having received fertility from God according to its capacity, it produces not only herbs and plants (as is clear to all) but also metals and precious stones. Therefore it follows: 'And there is gold, and the gold of that land is good, and there is born Bedolach (הבדולח) and Even ha-Shoham (ואבן השהם).' Some interpret Bedolach as Bdellium, others as crystal or talc; and Aven asobam as the onyx stone. Nor without reason are these three said to be born in the earth, so that, in a few words, it may be indicated what good and evil we have from the earth itself. For we have gold and other metals, all of which signify perishable and contemptible treasures, granted however for our uses, while we sojourn in this defiled earth: and that through them we may acquire heavenly ones. But Bdellium, that is, crystal or talc, are not dissolvable by any heat, as we have proven by clear experience. And the onyx stone is called wondrous, inwardly, around the center, of an earthly color, but on the circumference, of a heavenly color: Which two denote the crossroads of mortals journeying or dwelling upon the earth. For there are those who savor earthly things so much that their mind and their watery soul become hardened, like crystal or talc, over which no fire can prevail. I said 'watery soul,' since not without reason is it said in scripture: 'Let the waters bring forth every living soul.' But especially the rational soul is watery, so that it may be capable of the water of saving wisdom. But sometimes it is so hardened by malice and sin, that it is not dissolvable by any natural heat. But lest mortals thus hardened despair, it is said through the prophet [David]: [Marginal note: Dauid] 'He sends forth his crystal like morsels before the face of his cold; who can endure it? He will send forth his word, and melt them; his spirit will blow, and the waters will flow.' But others are made onyx stones, who, even if they are earthly in their central nature, yet contemplate heaven with their mind and affection, and tend towards heaven. As for the etymology of the river [Pishon], we have said that it signifies a toothed mouth: because while we are on earth, all food which we take with our mouth for the soul, must be pressed, ground, and ruminated by teeth, that is, by certain powers of the soul. And if anyone does not do this, he is considered unclean in the law. The second river is called Gihon (גיחון), and it signifies the breast, which was commanded to perform the office of feet for the serpent: The flowing water holds its likeness, without feet and hands, over the earthly channel, as if with its breast upon the earth; and the water of the sea creeps over the shores in the same manner. This river, moreover, circles all the land of Cush (כוש), which they interpret as Ethiopia, and also 'covered': For Cush (כוש) comes from 'cassah' (כשה), which means 'covered.' For water circles the entire earth, covering and enveloping it all around, except for this small portion which we inhabit. And the name of the third river is Hiddekel (חדקל), which by our people is interpreted as 'tiger': But it comes from 'chad' (חד).
T iiij

--- Page 435 ---
CANTICLE ONE

badad, which means sharpens, and `חד chal` (chad kal), which is interpreted as light, so that its meaning is sharp and light: And it denotes air, or an airy spirit, which is light, and more penetrating than fire: because fire can be excluded from entering anywhere more easily than air. And here it anticipates Assur, that is, the rich man, who is inflated by wind and air. Or it goes against Assur, that is, against one who speculates by himself: For Assur signifies both the rich man and the speculator: For he who wishes to speculate on divine things by himself, remains full of wind. And finally that airy spirit will so sharpen the body, already made light by grace, that it can penetrate the heavens, and whatever is opposed to it, better than this thick air.

Coming to the fourth river, Moses says: The fourth river is `הוא פרת hu` (hu perat), that is, *ipse perat* (he, Perat), for which we have, it is Euphrates: For Euphrates is interpreted as multiplying, or fructifying, or fruit-bearing, just as *perat* also means to fructify: Whence it denotes heat and igneous power, which provides fertility to all things, as we prove by experience: For with the arrival of heat, all things begin to germinate, and as it (the heat) intensifies, they ripen: and with its departure, the earth is stripped, and trees shed their fruits and leaves: For the Sun, who is called the father of life, provides life to lower things through heat, and agrees with God, who, being fire, gives fertility and fruit to all things: Which God, containing not only igneous power, but that of all elements, exists as a true source, from which all elemental power emanates. And this is hinted at (as more secret Theologians assert) by the four letters of His great name: For by the first, for many reasons which I pass over in silence, fire is indicated: By the second, which is the mark of aspiration, air: By the third, water, and by the fourth, earth, and all terrestrial things, with which that divine igneous power is united. And this is hinted at in the figure of that letter in which `י` (Yod), which is the first letter indicating divine igneous power (as we have said), is placed in the belly of that letter which is called `ר` (Resh), and imports two hundred, namely, two deduced by a hundred, which is the number of material things. But these things, as foreign to our Latins, and to those not initiated into such matters, we will omit.

The source therefore and the super-excellent sea, from which these four rivers flow, is the great four-letter name of God (as the [Marginal note: Hebrews] Hebrews say) or the power imported by that name, which the [Marginal note: Pythagoreans] Pythagoreans call Tetractys: and it indicates that the divine is fertile of all things, and from which are all things: Which Orpheus and Homer call Ocean, the origin of divine and human things, first always existing, second emanating in the generation of the Gods, third irrigating earthly things, fourth dripping into all fluid matter: Whose emanation again is found by form indeed in angels, by true participation and image in rational souls, by imaginary (participation) in those lacking reason, by shadow in the figures of bodies: Which four-fold emanation is also hinted at by the four-fold animals [Marginal note: Ezekiel] seen by Ezekiel, of which the Lion is fiery: the Eagle airy: Man, especially in soul, and in seed watery, as we have declared elsewhere: The Calf indeed earthy, and always dedicated to the cultivation of the earth: Which elements, composed together, show a single fa-

--- Page 436 ---
SEVENTH TONE. 149

-ce, and virtue, therefore it is said: Four faces to one, and four wings to one: Of which we have spoken enough above. And because some truth is contained in the literal description of those rivers, it must also be said concerning them, from where they originate, and where they flow, as we have learned from the most diligent Geographers. Pishon (as some assert, to whom Jerome assents) (Geographers) is the Ganges, a river of India, pre-eminent among rivers bearing gold. For these are counted among the gold-bearing rivers: the Tagus in Spain, the Eridanus in Italy, the Hebrus in Thrace, the Pactolus in Asia, the Ganges in India: its source is in the Median mountains, according to Artemidorus. (Artemidorus) And concerning this, the text says: "And the gold of that land is excellent." Gihon, however, which is considered to be the Nile, passing through all the land of Ethiopia and from the furthest bounds of the southern land, flows northward with a wonderful and varied course: For although for a long time its sources were uncertain, nevertheless, in the time of Nero, its origin is said to have been discovered on a mountain in Lower Mauretania, (Nero) not far from the Ocean, where a lake called Hilis stagnates. Then it hides itself for a journey of several days, and again bursts forth from another larger lake in Mauretania Caesariensis: And again received by the sands, through deserts of twenty days, it is carried to the nearest Ethiopians: Then it springs forth into a fountain, which is called black: From there, separating Africa from Ethiopia, it cuts through the middle of the Ethiopians by the name Astaplus, which in the language of those peoples means "water flowing from darkness." And here it forms many islands, the most famous of which is Meroë, named after the city Meroë, founded by Cambyses, and called by his mother's name: And finally, reaching the Egyptian sea through many mouths, it makes Egypt itself an island in the shape of the Greek letter Delta (Δ). Here, therefore, it originates in Africa, separated from Asia by the Arabian Sea, in which other rivers draw their origin: For the Tigris, which flows towards the Assyrians, originates in the region of Lesser Armenia from a conspicuous spring in a plain, where it flows more slowly, being called Diglito up to the borders of the Medes: then it begins to be called Tigris, because it seems to fly like an arrow: for the Medes call an arrow "tigris". And it flows into Lake Arethusa: and from there, carried along, meeting Mount Taurus, it plunges into a cave, and having flowed beneath, it bursts forth from the other side of it: which place they call Zeroarda. Then it crosses another lake, which is called Thesbitis, and again it plunges into subterranean channels, and after twenty-five miles, near Nymphaeum, it is returned so close to the Arsanias, that they flow together, but do not mix: for the lighter Arsanias floats on top. Soon, after a space of nearly four miles, divided, it plunges into the Euphrates. And finally, flowing with a vast channel, it is carried into the Persian Sea through ten mouths. The Euphrates, however, is said to originate on Mount Pariedrus in Greater Armenia, running through the same region, it distinguishes Greater Armenia from Cappadocia, and flows into the Arabian or Persian Gulf (which is called the Red Sea). Hence no conjecture remains as to how these four rivers could have the same origin, since they appear to originate from very distant places. Nor are there lacking those who assert that all of them have a single primary origin, but that they run through subterranean passages to different places, from which they seem to begin their course. But to the more discerning, it does not seem
T v.

--- Page 437 ---
of the Greek letter. Here then it rises in Africa, separated by the Arabian Sea,
from Asia, in which other rivers draw their origin: For the Tigris, which flows against
the Assyrians, rises in the region of Lesser Armenia from a conspicuous spring in a plain, where it flows more
slowly, being called Diglito up to the borders of the Medes: then it begins to be called Ti-
gris, because it seems to fly like an arrow: for the Medes call an arrow "tigris".
And it flows into Lake Arethusa: and from there, carried across, encountering Mount Taurus, it
plunges into a cave, and flowing beneath, it bursts forth from the other side of it: which place they
call Zeroarda. Then it crosses another lake, which is called Thesbitis, and again
plunges into underground channels, and after twenty-five miles, it reappears near Nym-
phaeum, so close to the Arsanias that they flow together, but do not mix: for the
lighter Arsanias floats on top: For a space of nearly four miles, it soon divides and plunges into the Euphra-
tes. And finally, flowing with a vast channel, it is carried into the Persian Sea by ten mouths.
The Euphrates, however, is said to rise in Mount Pariedrus of Greater Armenia, running through the
same region, it distinguishes Greater Armenia from Cappadocia, and flows into the
Arabian or Persian Gulf (which is called the Red Sea). From this, no conjecture
remains as to how these four rivers could have the same origin, since they appear to rise from very dis-
tant places. Nor, however, are there wanting those who assert that the primary origin of all of them is unique,
but that they run through subterranean passages to different places, from which they
appear to begin their course. But to the more prudent, it does not seem...
T v....

--- Page 438 ---
OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

...consistent, since spaces of lands and seas are interposed, so that the origins of those rivers cannot coincide, unless it were said that the sea, from which all rivers originate, is also the source of those four named rivers: But then there will not be any particular place which is called a garden, or paradise of delights, inaccessible to us. Hence that description of rivers seems entirely symbolic, by which are understood the four elements, and the principles of all that is produced: and is indicated that fourfold virtue of the four-letter name, or the fourfold principal emanation of the archetype: All of which are described by those four rivers, because they have a likeness of them, just as sacraments are described by trees, springs, a garden, and higher things of this kind.

What the Jordan, and the river Ieor of Egypt. Chapter XXIII.

[P]ost those four elementary rivers, from which all things consist, two other rivers are celebrated in scripture, one in the holy land of promise, which is called Jordan, and the other in the reprobate land of Egypt, named Ieor: Which, with great mystery, signify propitious and unpropitious emanations from the supermundane tribunal: The sign of which thing is, that all things done in the Jordan were good and beneficial: and those things done in the Ieor, on the contrary, were unpropitious and harmful. For in the Jordan were placed memorial stones of the passage of the children of Israel coming from Egypt and from the Moabites: In it Naaman the Syrian was healed at the command of Elisha: In it Christ was baptized, and John, who, preceding Christ's baptism, had himself also baptized in it. Therefore, from this and other causes, it is sung by the prophets, especially by the Psalmographer, in many places. In the Ieor, however, many evils are commemorated, perpetrated to the destruction of various people: For there the infants of the Hebrews were seen to be drowned. Afterwards, those waters, [Marginal note: Psalm.] by God's command, through Moses, were turned into blood so foul-smelling that the fish died, and the Egyptians were afflicted when they wanted to drink them, and that putrid gore spread throughout the entire region. It also brought forth frogs, which covered that Memphitic land, and finally, having died, collected into immense heaps, they infected the entire surrounding air. Therefore, the water of the Jordan is beneficial, while that of the Ieor, on the contrary, is harmful and destructive. But let us come to the names, which ought to be consistent with the things themselves. For Jordan is written in its own proper Hebrew idiom ירדן (yarden), which, reversed, makes נדרי (nederi), that is, "my vow", namely, a spontaneous offering which everyone makes of himself, wishing to perfectly serve God: With this offering made, all things succeed propitiously and happily. The other river, however, which was formerly called יארה (yorah) in scripture, was afterwards called היאור (haior) with a letter transposed, a great mystery now to be passed over in silence. But for now, lest we pass over the meaning of the changed word entirely in silence, we will only bring forth יאר (yor): For Ior signifies light, to which word, the letter ה (he) prefixed, according to the property of Hebrew grammar, has the force of an interrogation, so that the meaning of היאור (haior) is interpreted as, "Is it light?" Which interrogative sentence [implies] a negative

--- Page 439 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 105

implies, so that the meaning is: There is no light, and consequently neither good nor anything divine is there, but it remains named pernicious to those among whom it flows. Yet these rivers both emanate from heavenly tribunals, Jordan from the tribunal of mercy, and Haior from the tribunal of justice, so that in the former the sheep to be placed on the right may be washed, but in the latter the goats to be condemned and punished may be submerged.

What wine, milk, butter, and honey. Chapter XXIIII.

[Ornate initial H] These are not without mystery: wine, milk, butter, and honey, so often celebrated in sacred scripture. And so that we may come expeditiously to the interpretations of these words, which, like other things, are held metaphorically in sacred utterances, wine signifies the wisdom of lower things, milk and butter of higher things, and honey is the taste and sweetness that is had from tasting them. For Solomon was filled with wine and the wisdom of lower things above all who were before and after him, just as he had asked from God, who offered and promised to give whatever he might ask: For he said, "Give your servant an understanding heart, so that he may be able to judge your people and discern between good and evil: For who will be able to judge this great people of yours?" To whom the Lord (said): "Because you have asked for wisdom to discern judgment, behold, I have done for you according to your words, and I have given you a wise and understanding heart, so much so that no one like you has been before you, nor will rise after you." Nevertheless, although he was full of that wisdom, he still seems to seek another, grieving that he could not obtain it, as he says in his book of sermons, which in Greek is called Ecclesiastes, and in Hebrew Kohelet: "And I applied my heart to find wisdom." And again: "I thought in my heart to withdraw my flesh from wine, so that I might transfer my mind to wisdom." For from what wine does he withdraw his flesh, if not from the wisdom of earthly things, which do not well agree with heavenly things, just as neither does the wisdom of both? For this wisdom of lower things is signified by wine, born from an earthly vine, that is, from human intellects, although sometimes it is bestowed by God, as we recently said about Solomon: But that (wisdom) of divine things is offered from those exalted breasts, about which it is said in the Song of Songs: "Your breasts are better than wine." And this teaches the true discernment of good and evil, as it is said in Isaiah about Christ: "He shall eat butter and honey, so that he may know to refuse the evil and choose the good." For no one will know how to make a distinction between good and evil in cow's butter, but in that better wisdom, which is figured from above by the better part of milk, from which butter is made. And because for acquiring this wisdom, a separation of the better man from the animal (part) is required, and a certain ecstasy of the mind, which is called the "death of the kiss" by more secret Theologians, therefore, aspiring to it, he prefaces: "Let him kiss me with the kiss of his mouth." But why this better and divine wisdom is compared to milk, while that lower (wisdom) to wine, I deem it necessary to explain. For wine is drawn from a plant, but milk from an animal, which is better. That (wine) also intoxicates, but milk not at all, although both nourish. Wine also, when preserved and exposed, does not easily change;
[Marginal note: Ecclesia.]
[Marginal note: Isaias]
[Marginal note: Theolo.]

--- Page 440 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

or is corrupted: But milk, the longer it exists outside the udder, the worse it becomes, and most easily undergoes corruption, just as the wisdom of divine things and the secrets of God, the more it is revealed, the greater harm it suffers, like blood outside the veins: Therefore, it is to be communicated only among the perfect, and preserved in the heart according to that prophetic saying: "I have hidden your words in my heart, that I might not sin against you." But if milk is pressed into butter, it is preserved for a long time, but boiled, for longer. So too, divine wisdom, pressed and well-formed in the mind of its possessor, and boiled by the fire of love, is preserved for a long time, even as a seasoning for other foods, namely those teachings given by true teachers. But because both kinds of wisdom are good, provided that the wine-like wisdom is directed towards God, and is not perverted in a woman's heart, as was permitted in Solomon, lest anyone [Marginal note: Isaias] trust in it: And that both are given by God, Isaiah testifies, who in the name of God himself says: "All you who thirst, come to the waters," that is, to saving wisdom, "and you who have no money, hasten, and buy wine and milk without any exchange:" because, of course, they are given by God's generosity without any suitable recompense: Although both wine and milk are good, yet when mixed they are corrupted and putrefy: So too with lower and supreme wisdom. Therefore, whoever wishes to be wise in divine matters, it is necessary that he be stripped of lower wisdom, God speaking through Paul [Marginal note: Paulus Isaias] and the prophet, when dealing with the sending of higher wisdom: "I will destroy the wisdom of the wise." In the same way, when someone is too deeply immersed in lower wisdom and cunning, he is stripped of the higher. Therefore Adam was found naked, because he wished to know too much at the persuasion of the serpent, which is called *arum* [ערום], which means naked and cunning: so that we may be taught that the overly cunning is always stripped of divine [Marginal note: Salomon] wisdom: Hence, Solomon, who wished to mix both according to that saying, "I drank my wine with my milk," did not succeed well: But it turned out better and more fortunately for David, who was nourished with milk and honey, just as it was decreed for all the elect, that they should be nourished in a land flowing with milk and honey, as has been repeated so many times in scripture. And if only Solomon had not mixed wine and milk, but had been content with butter and honey with the Messiah, or honeycomb with honey and milk, as is said of the true bride: "Your [Marginal note: Canti.] lips distill honeycomb, honey and milk are under your tongue:" Which happens to all cultivators of that true land of promise.

What is the land flowing with milk and honey. Chapter XXV.

**P**ost we have explained what milk and honey are, it remains to unravel what that flowing land is. For it is not to be thought that God promised a land flowing with cow's milk, or sheep's milk, or bee's honey to his most chosen people, after so many labors traversing the desert, after the most burdensome observance of the law, after many wars waged in the name of the Lord. But there is another land (unless I am mistaken) truly flowing with divine milk and honey, which is celebrated with great renown and frequency in many places by the Law and the Prophets. For it is the promised land of the living, which flows with true milk and honey, for which the divine [person] sighed

--- Page 441 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 151**

the psalmist, who said: "I believe to see the good things of the Lord in the land of the living." Of which that land bore the type, to which the Israelite people were led after a long wandering in the desert: In which, above all regions, the prophetic spirit flourished, and the investigation of the secrets of the law, and wisdom, and the taste of divine things: so much so that that land is called by Daniel צבי Zebi, that is, glorious, as our translation has it [Daniel.], or renowned, as Jerome says, or land of strength, as it pleased Symmachus [Hieron. Symmā.], or pleasant, and pre-eminent above all others, not indeed by the fertility of corruptible things, because (as God testifies in Deuteronomy) [Deuter.] the land of Egypt is more fertile: Nor does it exceed others in breadth or pleasantness, because it is small and quite rugged. It is therefore pre-eminent, glorious, and renowned, because it is subject to the most abundant influence of prophecy, wisdom, and all divine things. For there the Patriarchs were raised, Abraham having been called from Mesopotamia of Syria: To the Israelite people going there, the law, most full of all wisdom, was given, so that the future inhabitants would be suitable for the place: There almost all prophecy was poured out: There very many prophets, powerful in deed, word, and wisdom: There Christ, in whom are all the treasures of wisdom, was conceived, born, and raised: And there he preached, and filled many with wisdom: Nor did he ever depart from that place, except when, still a child, he was taken away into Egypt, so that he might yield to Herod's cruelty. There he suffered, rose, and from there ascended into heaven, he gave the Holy Spirit there to his disciples, who would fill their hearts with all wisdom and all skill in languages, and feed them with milk and honey drawn from the most excellent land. There also was born, raised, and filled with the spirit, he who said: "How sweet are your words to my throat, sweeter than honey to my mouth": To taste which sweetness he invited others, saying: "Taste and see that the Lord is good." [David]

But if we wish to ascend to the allegorical sense, and perhaps one more intended by the Holy Spirit, this land flowing with milk and honey is the flesh and body of Christ, from whom flowed both water for the washing of sins, and milk and honey for the true food of life and spirit: indeed, the body itself was shown to us as bread, and the blood as wine. But the milk offered by him is now given to beginners, according to that of the apostle: "To you, as to infants, we offer milk." [Paulus] Now, however, it is given to the perfect, as it is said of the apostles and primary founders of the church under the name of the bride in the Song of Songs: "Honey and milk are under your tongue." [Cantic.] For then honey and milk were under the tongue of the bride, that is, of the apostles, whose assembly Christ accepted as his bride, so that through them he might generate other children, when that spirit of truth poured over them and fed them, so much so that throughout the whole world they spread the milk and honey received from him, that is, doctrine and the taste of divine things. And truly, milk is the food of the perfect, and of those who are children, that is, in cunning and malice, as that chief distributor of milk and honey says: "You have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to little ones." [CHRI STVS.] This food is therefore for the perfect, who, according to the king's decree, become like little children, so that they may enter the inner chambers of the kingdom of heaven, where they may be fed with true milk offered from those breasts, of which it is said in

--- Page 442 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

In the Canticles: "There I will give you my breasts." And again: "My beloved is mine, and I am his; he will dwell between my breasts." This milk always follows honey, because taste and delight lead to wisdom and the knowledge of divine things.

**What is Oil. Chapter XXVI.**

[Marginal notes: David, Joel, CHRIST.]
**O**il also is most celebrated in sacred writings, and necessary for many things: namely, for anointing kings, priests, and prophets; for anointing those cereal offerings that were offered; for maintaining lamps; and for healing infirmities. Nor do I believe that priests, kings, prophets, and sacrifices are sanctified by olive oil, but by a better virtue, of which that material oil was a sacrament. Therefore, the better and true oil is a certain divine virtue, indeed, divinity itself, represented by the oil we use.
[Marginal note: Canti.]
And concerning this better (oil) it is said in the Canticles: "Your name is oil poured out," that is, divinity, and the virtue of divinity itself indicated by oil. With this virtue, kings, prophets, and priests ought especially to be filled: Kings, because they bear a special representation and image of God on earth; prophets, because they perform miracles and foretell future events, which is proper to God, as Isaiah says: "Declare to us what is to come, and we will say that you are gods;" priests, because they perform the office of God by judging souls and remitting sins, and because they exist as mediators between God and men. But the middle (as is common in schools) ought to partake of both extremes. And because Jesus was King of kings, the highest prophet, and the greatest high priest, therefore he ought to have been filled with divinity above all, as the Psalmist sings: "God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of gladness above your companions." Indeed, it is rightly called the oil of gladness, because there is no true joy except where God dwells. He who serves Him ought always to be joyful. Hence Christ says: "When you fast," that is, when you devote yourselves to God through fasting, "do not be like the sad hypocrites." But
[Marginal notes: CHRIST., David]
rather at that time "anoint your head," so that you may be joyful, that is, according to that prophetic saying: "That he may make the face cheerful with oil." And this is "the cheerful giver, whom God loves." Nor let that evangelical saying be brought forward: "Blessed are those who mourn," because that mourning pertains to the carnal man, which must be taken up so that consolation may follow; therefore it is immediately added: "For they shall be comforted." Therefore, just as by the water of baptism that super-mundane water is indicated, so by oil and chrism is denoted oil, chrism,
[Marginal notes: John, Paul, Peter.]
and that anointing of divinity, about which John says: "You have an anointing from the Holy One, and you know all things." And Paul: "God, who has anointed us, and who has sealed us, and given the pledge of the Spirit in our hearts." By whom also Christ, as man, was anointed, as Peter says in the Acts of the Apostles: "God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power."

**What are the Palm, Cedar, Shittim wood, Hyssop, and Willow. Chapter XXVII.**

**A**mong plants, however, the palm, cedar, and hyssop are greatly celebrated: the former as the most excellent of all trees, and the latter as the most excellent of all smaller plants. For the palm is so celebrated that in two respects it holds the image of an animal. The first is, because it does not bear fru-

--- Page 443 ---
**VOLUME SEVEN. 152**

It fructifies without coitus, but its branches are impregnated by male buds, as if by a certain seed. The other is because in its upper part it has a kind of brain, which the Hebrews call הַלּוּלָב (hallulab), and the Arabs call chedar or gemar: If this is destroyed, the tree dies, just as an animal dies if its brain is destroyed: which indeed happens to this plant alone among all plants: and it is so famous that in the solemnity of the seventh month, its fronds were commanded to be offered, which the Hebrews properly call כַּפּוֹת (caphot), that is, palms, together with willows of the torrents, and branches of the עָבֹת (habot) tree, which we have translated as "of dense foliage": but Jerome and others wish to interpret that habot as myrtle. And all these things together with the fruits of the most beautiful tree, which is the citrus, or citron, always green, and bearing fruit at all hours, as is the common opinion of the Hebrews, who celebrate that solemnity to this very day with its fruit, which Galen calls citrinum, along with the fronds mentioned above: Emulating these Hebrews, the Lacedaemonians used to crown their gods with those fruits which they call oximala persica, as Aristophanes is the author. Nor is it without mystery that that solemnity is celebrated with this fruit, which is effective against poison when placed in wine that is drunk, as Dioscorides writes. Nor are the other trees without mystery, which made the day joyful in the same solemnity. For the palm (as we have said) holds a quite express likeness of an animal in its reproduction, and brain, and also in that it has a crown of foliage extended around its top, and branches stretched out like fingers, and fruits formed almost in the shape of fingers, whence they are called dactyli, that is, fingers. The pulp of these fruits is also called "flesh," indeed very medicinal and of the highest nutritional value, either from a certain quasi-animal force, or from a Phoebean nature: And it is of such great nourishment that certain Anchorites were content with only that food, just as to this very day many in Africa do not use other foods: And it is a fruit of many kinds, and more varied than all others. Moreover, it is a glorious tree, and has an express symbol of victory, because its branches never bend, but laden, they rise against the weight, as Aristotle and Plutarch write, and as we have learned from experience: Therefore, this is a type, likeness, and sign of glory, just as it has its power from the seat of glory, as is known to those who are initiated in such matters. The cedar, however (as those who deal with plants, Theophrastus, Dioscorides, and Pliny, sufficiently agree), is that which is called tya, providing the most excellent resin, which is called cedria and cedrium, most useful for toothaches; when inserted into cavities, it subdues them and soothes the pain: It also takes away life from the dying, because it assumes strength when vital heat is added, but it preserves dead bodies incorrupt by expelling and consuming harmful humors. Those who have written about plants also relate many things concerning the cedar, such as that when applied with salt to the bites of a horned viper, it is a remedy: It cures elephantiasis, and it is beneficial to drink a cup of it for lung ulcers. When injected as an enema, it is a safeguard against worms and moths, and against the mange of quadrupeds, dogs, and oxen: and that it burns like a torch. Also, its oil,

--- Page 444 ---
**OF THE FIRST SONG**

That which comes from it is much celebrated, perhaps indicating the source of true oil, namely, the place of divine mercy and piety, to which that tree corresponds: But whether this is the tree [Hebrews] from which the Ark of the Covenant was made, or whether it was a larch, as many Hebrews [Pliny] assert, or a cedar of another kind, from which (as Pliny and others relate) precious tables of nobles were made, we hold as uncertain. But in this all the wise men of the Hebrews agree, that shittim wood and the cedar, which they call ארז erez arezim in their idiom, are entirely the same, indeed a tree most famously sung about by the divine lyre-player [David], because it is, namely, the tree of Adonai, planted by Him in Lebanon, that is, in the true supramundane forest and garden of delights, or in that most eminent pure divine mind: For Lebanon signifies both, namely a forest and white or pure. Therefore, this tree is sacramental, as are the palm and the myrtle, with which, by God's command, the feast days of the seventh month were celebrated: For cedars signify the more eminent saints, and God's chief leaders planted by Him: But palms signify the victories which they achieve in God's warfare: But the myrtle, bestowing in manifold infirmity, a multi-faceted grace of healings, which God bestows on those who overcome. And those legitimately celebrate God's feasts who are planted by the Father: for they conquer and report triumph with the Son, and are beneficial to the needy and succor them with the sevenfold spirit: or (following the theology of the Hebrews) those celebrate the true feasts of God who are beautiful trees adorned by Tipheret and the glory of God, and strengthened by true celestial strength, which is called Geburah, and anointed with the oil of piety and divine benignity for their own and others' health and salvation. To these, however, are added the willows of the brook, not because (as I think) unfruitful trees belong to these, on which the prophet says instruments were hung, lest the songs and harmonies of God be heard over the unworthy rivers of Babylon: [The same] For he says, "In the willows in its midst we hung our instruments." But as far as another meaning, they can agree with those sacramental trees and feasts: for where we have "and willows of the brook," in Hebrew it is said וערבי נחל uehirbe nachal, which can signify "and the delights of inheritance": For ערב harab is interpreted as "willow" and "pleasant" or "delightful." But נחל nachal signifies "torrent" and "inheritance," so that both senses can exist, namely, "willows of the brook" and "the delights of the supernal, namely, and celestial inheritance," of which a taste is made by those who rightly celebrate the true solemnities: Therefore, for those who celebrate thus, the prophet [David] sings: "Exult to God our helper, shout for joy to the God of Jacob: take a psalm, and give a timbrel, a pleasant psaltery with the harp: blow the trumpet at the new moon, on the glorious day of your solemnity." But if the willows of the brook, signified by that hirbe nachal, are understood in another sense, by these are indicated our bodies, which are unfruitful; indeed, we ourselves are barren, unless we are irrigated by the upper waters, and planted beside the watercourses, so that we may be able to bear fruit in its season: Therefore, not without reason are these willows called "of the brook," which are set apart for celebrating the festivities of God. Nor without mystery do these celebrants, now through

--- Page 445 ---
**VOLUME SEVEN. 153**

willows, now described by fruitful trees: because everyone is unfruitful
when left to himself, but fruitful when irrigated by that super-mundane water, which
says: Without me you can do nothing. Also greatly celebrated is that plant, which in He- [CHRI STVS.]
brew is called אזוב ezob, which from the proximity of the word they have translated as hyssop, but
in truth it is libanotis, which the Romans formerly, but today all Italians call Rosemary:
which among plants is indeed most noble, and more excellent than is thought,
although it may be cheapened by its multitude and commonness: For it is ever-green,
harmful to none, and an enemy to many infirmities, especially the falling sickness (epilepsy), which
is demonic. Its root also with honey purges ulcers, cures gripes,
and serpent bites, if drunk with wine. It is also beneficial for the royal disease (jaundice)
in wine with pepper: And it prevails against greater evils, the more it enjoys greater
protection and heavenly favor, by which all virtue is preserved: Therefore not without cause
it was commanded to be taken for making sprinklings with the blood of animals in the law,
according to what the prophet sings: Sprinkle me, O Lord, with hyssop, and I shall be cleansed. For it indicates [Dauid]
that degree of divinity among the more secret Theologians, or that measure
by which we are joined to God, and God with us: By the sprinkling of which we are cleansed from sins,
expiated, and perfected. Hence, for the sacrament of this thing, sprinklings were commanded
to be made with that sacramental plant.

**What of the vine, and the vineyard. Chapter XXVIII.**
[Decorative initial E] Among trees, the vine is also most celebrated, planted first by Noah (as is openly contained
in the sacred scriptures) on the earth, from which the curse given through the sin of the protoplasts
and the fratricide was removed,
whose seed was utterly destroyed by the deluge of waters: But Noah, not yet
well initiated in this business of the vine and wine, became drunk and revealed his private parts,
so that he might be mocked by his son, who bound his father's private parts (as Berosus writes, [Berosus]
or cut them off, as others relate) lest he complete what he had conceived when he planted the vine:
All these things are written in figure and under veils: For through this
vine a better vine is understood: which our Redeemer, taking upon himself, to such an extent
that he became it himself, says: I am the true vine, and you are the branches. And again, [CHRI STVS.]
speaking of both vines, he says: From now on I will not drink of this fruit of the vine, until
I drink it new with you in the kingdom of my Father. Behold how clearly he explains both this vine,
which provides our material wine, and that one, which produces heavenly and
better wine. For through this, that supreme vine is understood, which gives wine
to gladden the heart of everyone, according to that of the prophet: And wine
gladdens the heart of man. For without it there is no true joy. Therefore, the true [Dauid]
vine is the justice of God, which gladdens righteous hearts both in distributing and in punishing,
just as the Psalmist sings: The righteous will rejoice when he sees vengeance. And [Idem]
if sometimes he is disturbed by apparent injustice, seeing the peace of sinners, and
the undeserved oppression of the righteous, nevertheless, when all things have been weighed by the most just governor
with an equal balance, and judged by a righteous examination, they finally rejoice in those things, concerning which

--- Page 446 ---
**CANTICI PRIMI**

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;a little before, they were saddened by things not well perceived. This vine is also said to be fertile,
Pſalm. &nbsp;&nbsp;to such an extent that fertile things are compared to it in many places, as it is found in the psalm: "Your wife
Eccleſia &nbsp;is like a fruitful vine in the sides of your house." And in Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;says: "I, like a vine, have brought forth a pleasant fragrance." This is so because from there, that is, from that lofty
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;strength denoted by the vine, a more potent power emanates, which, by means of God's grace,
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;brings forth very many fruits. And what is wonderful, the vine, when ap-
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;plied to any tree, produces fruits, but of various kinds.

--- Page 447 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 154

(the Hebrews) to place Canaan, the youngest son of Ham, in that place, so that
he would not feel divine justice upon himself, and less so the other brothers
who preceded him. Hence not Ham cursed Noah, but Canaan, from whom the
occasion for error was taken: The sentence of which curse was: Canaan shall be
a servant of servants to his brothers: So that thus the error which he had
committed, while he preferred him too much, might be corrected by due
oppression. But if someone plants a vine in the proper place, and drinks from
its fruit, tempered with the water of wisdom, and (eats) suitable compacted
bread, vapors do not rise, nor does it lead to drunkenness; but it strengthens
the powers, and gives the power to work. Hence the supreme teacher exhorts
us to partake of both foods, saying: He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
abides in me, and I in him: Which flesh he had previously called bread, and
elsewhere he named blood wine. Which again he commanded to be taken under
penalty of threat, while he says: Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man
and drink his blood, you will not have life in you. Therefore these things must
be eaten by us, so that we may both have life, [Marginal note: Idem] and be able to do good work.
To which again the heavenly teacher invites us, saying: Go also into my
vineyard: indeed, the vineyard of his church, which he planted here below in
the likeness of that super-mundane vineyard and court: For in both places a
twofold tribunal has been erected: namely, of justice and of mercy, prefigured
by wine and bread, blood and flesh, right and left, and many such things, so
that both rewards may be given for good works, and suitable punishment may
be inflicted for evil ones: For by this law everyone is introduced into the
vineyard of the Lord, namely, to receive punishment or reward according to
his works. Therefore it is said: that the Master of the house, after he had
planted the vineyard, surrounded it with a hedge, or set boundaries, or placed
a guard, dug a winepress in it, by which the wine of justice might be pressed;
and built a tower: or a granary, in which the wheat of mercy and piety might
be stored: The use of these two is necessary, as Augustine most excellently
said: [Marginal note: August.] To every rightly done deed, love and fear lead: Indeed, love of
benign promise and of the promised thing, and fear of punishing justice:
Which, like two spurs, drive to every good work, or, like bread and wine,
refresh the mind of the worker. But if these two are disordered, and that which
ought not to be loved or feared, is loved and feared, they become spurs driving
to every evil, and lethal food and drink. Hence Augustine adds the opposite
sentence to the former, saying: [Marginal note: Idem] To every sin, love and fear lead: For just
as the love and fear of God draw to every good, so the love and fear of the
world drive to every evil. Which we can learn from the Savior, who, just as he
promises life and reward to those who are fed by bread and wine, or flesh and
blood (those two signifying, namely, love and fear), so the Apostle threatens
those who abuse such things, loving and fearing [Marginal note: Paulus] what they ought not, while
he says: He who eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to
himself, not discerning the body of the Lord: in which he had received both:
justice, while he exposed his very body to punishments, and piety and mercy,
while through the same wound-
V ij

--- Page 448 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...while through the same wound he obtained for us such grace and pardon. Thus also, leading the mystical body to action, he finally decided to render to each according to his works. And lest man, instead of fearing and loving God, should fear and love the world, He strove to separate him from the world itself with all diligence. And this is what the prophet sings under the type of the vineyard: "You brought a vine out of Egypt, you cast out the nations, and planted it." For he led us out of the darkness and distress of this world into his wonderful light, from which those had been cast out who were called angels of light, but now are [angels] of darkness.
[Marginal note: David] Or, following the truth of the letter, in which there is 'vine' and not 'vineyard', this vine of Egypt is the human race subject to sin, and confined in the darkness and distress of this world, figured by Egypt: which he shattered, or permitted to be shattered or trampled. For the word 'tasiah' is a present tense verb of the third mood or conjugation, and it signifies not 'you brought out' (as we have in our translation) but 'you permit to shatter, or to trample,' or

--- Page 449 ---
**TONE SEVEN. 155**

invasions and slaughters, which ought to be inflicted by enemies in that vineyard, he said: "Why have you destroyed," that is, "permitted to be destroyed, its wall or hedge, and all who pass by the way, namely diabolical and worldly enemies, harvest it?"
Concerning the former, it follows, saying: "The wild boar, or pig from the forest, which signifies the devil, has exterminated or devastated it:" since it is a demonic animal: whence the devils, who were cast out by Christ, said: "Send us into the pigs, as into a place suitable for them." And concerning worldly enemies, it adds: [Hebrew: רוח שדי] sadai, that is, the vapor, or smoke of the field, has grazed and demolished it: For which we have: "and a singular wild beast has grazed it:" For the vapor and smoke of the field signifies all worldly enticements, which consume and dissipate the human vine, lest it grow for God and bear fruit. Therefore, for the repair of this vineyard thus demolished, the prophet prays, adding: "God of hosts, turn, now look down from heaven, and see, and visit this vineyard: And perfect it, which your right hand has planted, and upon the Son of Man, whom you have confirmed, or strengthened for yourself." But who this Son of Man is, is clear to all, to whom the Father has handed over all power of cleansing and perfecting that vine, as we read in John: "Every branch that bears fruit, he will prune it, so that it may bear more fruit:" [Marginal note: John.] Which, although it is said of the Father, is also understood of the Son, who is one and the same with the Father, and who is now called the true vine, now the vinedresser, and now the lord of the vine and vineyard, also having the power to constrain those who demolish it, and having the right to reward all who work in it. Therefore, either the Father, or the Son himself, has leased this to vinedressers, that is, to ourselves, so that we might work and guard it, rendering due fruits in their season. The vine, therefore, is a tree, which we are: and the vineyard is the place in which the vines are, that is, this world, or the place in which we are planted by the distribution of divine justice, which is the super-worldly vine, by which this lower vine is cultivated and cherished, whose trunk is Christ, and we are the branches, or shoots, bearing as much fruit as we receive from it by remaining in the vine itself, from which we may produce fruit, as the vine itself says: "Just as a branch cannot [Marginal note: CHRIST] bear fruit from itself, unless it remains in the vine, so neither can you, unless you remain in me."

**Concerning the animals of holiness. Chapter XXIX.**

**T**hough elsewhere we have touched upon those animals which Ezekiel saw, [Marginal note: Ezekiel.] not only signifying the four evangelists in an allegorical sense (as is the common opinion of our wise men) but also something in the archetype, to whose vision the prophet was subject, as it clearly implies when it says: "And above the firmament that was over their heads, like the appearance of a sapphire stone:" for above the firmament is the throne of Him who says: "Heaven is my throne:" [Marginal note: GOD.] Whose appearance is written to be like a sapphire stone not without mystery. And again it says: "This vision was the likeness of the glory of the Lord:" Nevertheless, here we will declare that not only those four animals, which by the Hebrews are called animals of holiness, but also all

**V iij**

--- Page 450 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

other things have in the archetype their images and exemplars: all of which, placed in the holy ar-
[Marginal note: Ioan.]
mary, can be called holy. When therefore John reports that he saw
before the throne of God lions, leopards, horses, oxen, dragons, and suchlike, he does not
speak of those horses which carry us, or those serpents which bite us, but of their
exemplars which are in God, or he indicates the places, or divine powers of the Creator (from which these lower
things receive their power): Or he implies the intelligences which preside over these animals themselves,
just as over plants, stones, and all things which here below have some
power. Nor should anyone be offended if we say that animals are in God, since John says:
[Marginal note: Idem]
*That which was made in him was life, life indeed creative, generative, and continu-*
*ously flowing, namely, by sustaining and preserving the things produced, lest they flow away into nothingness.*
Which animals, in an anagogical sense, no one doubts, are those which we have explained: In
[Marginal note:

--- Page 451 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 156**
...we will discuss more expressly the divinity in particular animals, or those measures signifying the Archetype.

**What are roe deer, stags, & fawns. Chapter XXX.**
[Decorative drop cap C] We see stags, fawns, roe deer, and goats celebrated excessively in sacred scripture, not only in the Canticles, but in the law, and Davidic hymns. [Marginal note: Exodi.] For in the law it is commanded that the tabernacle be covered with dyed skins of goats: And with the kidneys and fat of any animal forbidden, stags and roe deer are granted to be eaten entirely as clean, as we read in Deuteronomy, where it is said: "But just as you eat the roe deer, you shall also eat the stag." [Marginal note: Deuteri] And again: "They shall eat of them, as of the roe deer and the stag," of which, namely, all intestines are eaten, except the blood: because in it is the soul, which ought not to be eaten together with the flesh, because the soul of an animal does not turn into nourishment for man, but into his depravation, defilement, and destruction (as they say). In the title, however, of the twenty-first psalm, where we have, "For the Chief Musician; upon Aijeleth Shahar" (literally "At the end, for the morning reception"), it is found in the truth of the letter, "For the hind of the dawn." And in many other places, the prophet here celebrates stags so much that we clearly understand them to refer to something better and hidden, just as Origen also agrees, when he says: [Marginal note: Orige.] "The stag, or roe deer, animals indeed according to the reason of nature, which they corporally bear, are referred to certain causes of corporal things, and to those invisible stags seems to apply that which is written: 'The voice of the Lord preparing the stags.'" [Marginal note: Psalm.] For what preparation from the voice of the Lord is there for these visible stags? Or what doctrine from the voice of the Lord ever descended to them? Therefore, stags are spiritual, whose form and image that corporal animal holds, which by the voice of the Lord is disposed to pursue the race of serpents: By that voice, indeed, of the law and of evangelical doctrine, which disposes and prepares stags—that is, those who have truly been made clean by the washing of baptism and by the words of Christ—to fight under Michael, indeed under Christ, against the serpent and that ancient dragon, who is the devil: In which fight, both from labor, and from inflamed zeal, and also from the expelled venom of the serpent, they are rendered thirsty, and desiring the fountain of true water, as it is said in the psalm: "As the stag desires the fountain of waters, [Marginal note: Psalm.] so my soul desires You, O God." Whose young or fawns are those who are newly initiated in the way of the Lord, that they may run to the mountains, of which it is said: "High mountains for the stags." For mountains are the pinnacles of virtues, to which run those who are inflamed with the love of virtue, and ascend above, who have already reached the pinnacle of virtue. In the archetype, however, stags and roe deer represent those divine powers and influences, from which those animals, and men signified by them, receive that by which they can be, and are called stags, or roe deer: Of which sublime stags, the fawns are called by more secret theologians those lower measures, which are beneath those fuller measures of piety and justice designated by stags and roe deer. Through these divine powers, therefore, or divine properties, Solomon adjures [Marginal note: Salomon] V iiij

--- Page 452 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

the wisest in the Canticles when he says: "I adjure you, daughters of Jerusalem, by the gazelles and the stags of the fields, that you stir not up, nor awake my beloved." The bond of this oath is, by the tribunal of grace, from which the good are rewarded, and by the tribunal of justice, whence the wicked are punished. Hence, swearing by these and adjuring by all censures and sentences emanating from the supernal tribunals, he submits and binds himself, so that he cannot in any way be absolved, but may receive a reward for the observance of the oath, and punishment for its transgression. And because the lower measures, which are called fawns, are also called breasts, namely those which nursed all the prophets, therefore in the same Canticles it is said: "Your two breasts are like two fawns, twins of a gazelle." [Marginal note: The same]

What are sheep, and shepherds of sheep. Chapter XXXI.

**S**heep are also always blessed in sacred scripture, so much so that eventually those to be placed at the right hand of the judge, who will receive a reward for their good deeds, are called sheep: and many of those who were raised to higher ranks pastured sheep. For Abel the just was a shepherd of sheep, Abraham the chief patriarch, Jacob a shepherd of sheep, and the twelve sons, princes of the twelve tribes: Who are also taught by Joseph, so that when asked by Pharaoh about their occupation and industry, they should answer, "We are shepherds of sheep, and our fathers from our infancy even until the present." Nor is what follows devoid of mystery: "The Egyptians detest all shepherds of sheep:" For the worldly and evil have always detested those who walk in simplicity in all things, and in the straight way of the Lord, [Marginal note: CHRIST] according to what the supreme Truth says: "If the world hates you, know that it hated me before you:" For Egypt always signifies the worldly and oppressors of the good. Moses also pastured sheep, when he was called by God to accomplish greater things. David was also a shepherd of sheep, when, by the Lord's command, he was anointed king of Israel by Samuel. But what is greater, the shepherd of sheep [Marginal note: The same] is God, and Christ and the Messiah himself, who says: "I am the good shepherd, and I know my sheep." But concerning God himself, clothed in no flesh, the Psalmograph says: "You led [Marginal note: David, Ezekiel] out your people like sheep." More clearly however in Ezekiel: "I myself (he says) will seek out my sheep, and I will visit them, as a shepherd visits his flock: and I will deliver them from all places where they have been scattered: I will feed them in the richest pastures, on the high mountains of Israel shall be their pastures: There they shall rest in green grass, and in fat pastures they shall feed upon the mountains of Israel: For I will feed my sheep, says the Lord God." Indeed, sheep are pastured, cattle are pastured, goats and kids are pastured, and pigs are pastured, but no mention is made of these in sacred scripture, because they are entirely unclean: But sheep, cattle, and kids, or goats, contain their own mysteries: For sheep are very simple animals, and always most useful, full of all gentleness, and removed from all harm. Therefore, those who pasture sheep, that is, are meek and simple, harming no one, and always benevolent, are loved by God and exalted: But kids and goats harm the vine itself, provoking-

--- Page 453 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 157**

...king the vine: Which vine we recently said signifies divine justice, which is diminished and provoked by those who offend God and sin. And therefore, like wanton kids, they are said to be placed on the left hand of the judge, to receive punishment for their misdeeds from Him, just as the gentle and benevolent sheep are said to be placed on the right hand. Therefore, God entrusts His better sheep to the shepherds of these sheep, as to those trained in good deeds and faithful ministers, whom He Himself, as the true and principal shepherd, feeds and governs. Therefore, the true shepherds of the sheep are those who, simple, harmless, and always doing good, follow gentleness and piety. But if kids are to be pastured by us, it must be observed what is said in the Canticles: "Feed your kids beside the tents of the shepherds," **[Marginal note: Canticles:]** that is, of the sheep: Beside which tents we pasture the kids when we restrain our anger and passion, and the furious impulses of wantonness, guiding them with sheep-like simplicity: For then the kids, having been pastured and initiated into the ways of the sheep, can, placed with them at the right hand of the judge, await blessing and the reward of good works.

**What are clean and unclean animals, fish, birds, and plants. Chapter XXXII.**

**Q**uatre kinds of living things the Supreme Creator produced for human food: plants and their fruits, fish, birds, and quadrupeds: In each of these kinds, He created clean and unclean, just as among those who eat them, some are clean and some are unclean. For animals and humans feed on plants, but the foods are distinct, as God says: **[Marginal note: GOD.]** "Behold, to you humans I have given every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of the earth, and every fruit-bearing tree, and every tree bearing seed; these shall be for your food." "But to every beast of the earth, and to every bird of the heavens, and to everything that creeps upon the earth, in which there is a living soul, I have given every green herb for food." And so it was established. Therefore, He distinguishes foods, although our translation speaks confusedly of such things: For He gave seed-bearing plants and fruit-bearing trees to man, who has the industry for sowing and gathering: But to beasts, who do not know how to sow, He allotted the greenness of herbs, which grow spontaneously, as the Psalmograph sings, **[Marginal note: David]** producing hay for cattle, which comes from herbs that grow spontaneously, and grass, namely cultivated grass, for the service of men. Indeed, He granted this along with fruit-bearing trees to man, as clean and better: But those wild herbs He tacitly prohibited as unclean, by giving them to animals for food: Which things, spoken enigmatically, indicate that unfruitful works, which have neither seed from which fruits can be sown and gathered, are left to beasts as unclean: But those things which have fruit and the seed of doing good are assigned to man as clean. Concerning animals, fish, and birds, however, making a clear distinction between clean and unclean, He forbade the former and permitted the latter, as we read in Leviticus and Deuteronomy: **[Marginal notes: Leviticus. Deuteronomy:]** For He first distinguishes clean animals from unclean by a twofold sign: Of which, one is to ruminate, or (as it is in Hebrew) to raise the cud: The other is un-

--- Page 454 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

[Marginal note: Origen.] division of the hoofs: All these things said about animals, Origen, fortified by the authori-
[Marginal note: Paul] ties of the apostles and Christ, judges to pertain to humans: For when Paul spoke
of those fathers to whom this law was given, he said: All ate the same spiritual
food and drank the same spiritual drink: And they drank
[Marginal note: The Same] from the spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ. And again: Let no
one judge you in food or drink, which are a shadow of things to come, namely, of men,
[Marginal note: Peter.] to whom all those things refer: And to Peter, who had ascended to pray,
seeking with Christ the things that are above, a vessel was shown, in which were all four-
footed animals, creeping things, and birds, and a voice was added, saying: Rise, kill,
and eat: And when Peter feared to do it, lest he be defiled, it was said again:
What God has cleansed, you must not call common. And this was repeated three times, because
[Marginal note: Origen.] they were cleansed (says Origen himself) by the power of the most holy Trinity, which Christ,
the cleanser of these things, had taught: Who also said: What enters the mouth does not
defile a person. Therefore, to raise or bring back the grain, or to chew the cud, is to
meditate on the food of sacred scripture, which we receive, and the prayers which we pour out to God.
Which are uttered in vain and to no purpose without mental attention: so also are
[Marginal note: David] the sacred words read in vain, unless he who reads them meditates. Therefore the prophet sings: Blessed
are those who search His testimonies. And again: Blessed is the man who meditates on the law of the Lord
day and night: Where not reading, but meditation is commended, and in it a person
is proclaimed blessed. Therefore, he chews the cud and brings back the grain, who with an attentive mind turns
over what he reads, so that he may complete in deed what he understands and meditates upon: But he
raises the grain when he performs good works outweighing the debts, which are
contracted from committed faults: But he has a cloven hoof who, from premeditated
law, knows how to make a distinction between good and evil, rejecting the one, and
embracing the other: Both, however, are necessary, because knowledge and
discretion are not sufficient unless what is born is completed by deed: Nor can the choice of good be made unless
knowledge of the thing to be chosen precedes it. But fish are judged clean which have
wings and fins, by which they may be lifted from the mire, and scales to be put off, so that they may put on the new
man: But those who wallow in the mire without scales and wings signify those,
who, enveloped in the dung of luxury, or the mud of earthly things, never know how to
depart from them. But unclean birds are those which have strong claws and devouring
beaks, living by plunder. And these signify those who always invade others' possessions, never
content with their own portion. But harmless birds are considered clean, which signify the meek,
the gentle, and those who harm no one. But that these foods to be eaten
signify men, we can learn quite clearly from the Gospel, as Christ
[Marginal note: CHRIST] said concerning the Samaritans coming to faith: I have other food to eat, which you do not know.
My food is to do the will of My Father who sent Me. Therefore, just as the
Samaritans beginning to convert were Christ's food, so also each one of
us, while doing good works, is His food, and while imparting doctrine or
some benefit to his neighbor, is the food of Him whom he serves.
Thus Christ became

--- Page 455 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 158

...So Christ became our food, giving himself to us in many ways, so that he might fittingly say: I am [Marginal note: Ioan] the living bread, who came down from heaven; if anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. The bread and food of life, indeed, was administering to us the doctrine of life, the food of life, and the works of life. So also we, while we offer such things to our neighbors, are to them the food of life, and pure, and clean food.

But they are the food of death, and unclean, [Marginal note: DEVS:] who teach pestilential doctrines, or offer a stumbling block to life, or deny by their deeds what they preach with words: to whom God says: Why do you declare my justice, and take my testament in your mouth? But you have hated discipline, and have cast my words behind you? If you saw a thief, you ran with him, and with adulterers you placed your portion, and the rest that follows. Of these, as if unclean animals, the Apostle says: Do not eat with such people. And these things as to the mystical sense. [Marginal note: Paulus]

But returning to the literal sense, from where animals and plants derive cleanliness or uncleanness, it would be necessary to investigate: But it cannot be done without a deeper and profound investigation: For they are not clean or unclean of themselves: Nor does it seem that any evil proceeds from God, the good progenitor, or that anything unclean should fall from the supremely pure, since it was especially said: God saw [Marginal note: Genesi] all that he had made, and behold, it was very good. On the other hand, it appears that hostile and evil things proceed from him, who says through Isaiah: I am he who makes good, [Marginal note: Isaias] and creates evil; I make light, and create darkness: Which can be understood thus: Since to create is from nothing, and is terminated at the subject, or matter, which has the nature of evil, therefore it is said "creating evil": And since to make is terminated at the form, which has the nature of good, therefore it is said "making good." Therefore, whatever things, insofar as they decline towards matter, have the nature of evil, and those which approach the highest form more, the more they have the nature of good. And this is what is said in Ecclesiasticus: Against evil is good, against life is death, and against the just man, [Marginal note: Ecclesia:] who is devoted to God, is the sinner always declining to the lowest things. It follows: Thus behold all the works of the Most High, two against two, and one against one, because there is no good in the world without its contrary: For there are angels of light, and angels of darkness: angels of life, and angels of death: a dwelling of light, and a dwelling of darkness: A cup of the clean, and a cup of the unclean: Which indeed were made by God and are good in their order, although unclean to us: Which uncleanness they derive either from a fierce and rapacious spirit, Mars influencing (as the Astronomers say) or Samael, his intelligence, as the Hebrews assert: Or they have it from Saturn, so that infected by bad melancholic humor, they become seats of uncleanness, just as good joy is the seat of a good spirit, indeed of God: From which the prophet [Marginal note: Dauid] says: Restore to me the joy of your salvation, and in many places he teaches to serve the Lord in joy. Or let this influence be from a higher divine power, through secondary causes, favorable or unfavorable. Some things are called, and are, clean, because they bring no defilement to the eater, but joyful and good nourishment: But others cause much harm, generated by black bile, or infecting with poison, as is the case with many plants, and reptiles of all-

--- Page 456 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...as is known concerning many plants and all reptiles: Whence these, as harmful by open or hidden detriment, yet known to God, are forbidden by Him who loves us, while others are permitted, which bestow benefit upon the body and spirit.

**What Jerusalem, Sion, & the temple are. Chapter 34.**

[Large decorative initial S] But if we come to the dwellings of that most sacred region, which is not without reason called the Holy Land, even it, with its adjacent places, are sacramental. And among other places of that promised and figurative region, the most celebrated of all cities is Jerusalem: which by common opinion indicates and prefigures that super-celestial city, in which all the blessed ought to dwell. Sion, however, where was the citadel, and the royal palace, and the priesthood of the prince, signifies the more eminent mansions of that supernal city, which (as CHRIST testifies) are many there. Therefore, the congruence of these must be examined: First, indeed, they agree in name, as is trivial, and also in the meaning of the name itself: For Jerusalem (as is commonly said) signifies a vision of peace, which most perfect vision and enjoyment of peace, and of its prince, is had in that supernal city: Or (as others say) Jerusalem can be translated as "inheritance to them," so that the word is derived from *iaras*, which is "to inherit," and *lemo*, which is "to them": Whence Jerusalem is well called as if *Ierus lemo* ירוש למו. Which interpretation well suits the supernal Jerusalem, in which an inheritance is given to each one, concerning which the prophet DAVID says: "My inheritance is glorious to me." Also the king and founder of this lower city was Melchizedek: and the king and founder, and the chief foundation of that supernal Jerusalem was He who was constituted by God a priest according to the order of Melchizedek. But co-reigning and co-workers with Him in building the city out of living stones are all who, according to the commands of the prince, govern themselves well: so that each one can be called Melchizedek, which means "my king is righteous." This also is situated upon mountains with a temple, and in the middle of the world. That also, upon the revolution of the outermost sphere, having a temple in the middle, erected perpendicularly above this lower temple, as witnesses of no mediocre faith assert: Among these temples is a celestial, or angelic one, responding to both in a straight line: Concerning these three temples the Jerusalemites used to boast, saying: (as is found in JEREMIAH) "The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord is this!" Yet Jeremiah rebuked them, saying: "Do not trust in lying words, saying, 'The temple of the Lord!'" Not indeed attributing it to a lie that they asserted it to be the temple of the Lord, and this threefold: but because they wanted to trust in the temple without works, which great lie was ingratitude, and a sin all the greater, the more effective was the influx of charisms upon the place, and the temple, and the city, which was preeminent in a region flowing with milk and honey: And in which flowed the milk of prophecy, of celestial hymns, of gospels, and of all celestial doctrine: And in which was the most celebrated temple of God, corresponding to the upper temple described by EZECHIEL, and mentioned by ISAIAH, who said: "The house was full..."

--- Page 457 ---
TONE SEVEN. 159

His majesty, and those things which were under Him, filled the temple. Therefore that place, next to the supermundane temple, was specially chosen by the Lord, who says in Second Chronicles: "I have chosen and sanctified this place, that My name may be there [Paralip.] forever: and My eyes and My heart may remain there all days." He also commanded that all sacrifices signifying the sacrifice of sacrifices, which the high priest Christ offered on the altar of the cross outside the gate of that city, be offered there. Hence it is asserted by Hebrew doctors that the sin committed in Jerusalem, and in the temple fortified with such excellences, and rejoicing in the special presence of the prince, is greater. Hence it was said not without mystery to David ascending from Hebron to reign in Jerusalem: "You shall not enter here, unless you remove the blind and the lame," that is, ignorance and sin. But the holy king himself not only removed the blind and the lame who hated his soul, and were hateful to him (as it was widely spread by proverb: "The blind and the lame shall not enter the temple"), but he dwelt (our text says) in the citadel of Zion, or its fortification, as the literal truth has it, that is, in a special influx by which he strengthened and fortified himself, so that he would not sin: And he called it the city of David, and built it around from the Millo, and within [David], as our translation has it: Or according to the Hebrew truth מן המלוא min amilo, that is, he fortified it from the fullness of charismata. And that the text speaks of a better fortification than that of walls, appears in what follows: "And he went on and grew great, and the Lord God of hosts was with him:" because, namely, he had fortified himself with divine gifts and emanations. But that temple was built after the manner of the ark, or the tabernacle of the covenant, representing both worlds, namely the greater and the lesser, after whose example (as we said) the ark and the temple were built: In these figurative rites, figurative sacred acts were performed until true sacred acts should succeed, which would not be perfected in a man-made temple, but in a better and more perfect one, concerning which the Apostle says: "You are the temple of God" [Paul]. In this, if we perform sacred rites well by purifying it, we shall ascend to another temple, concerning which the Apostle again says: "A tabernacle not made with hands" [Idem] which is Christ Himself: into whom entrance is given to us through the door, which is He Himself: Having entered into Him, and united with Him, we ascend to the supermundane temple, concerning which it is said in the Apocalypse: "The Lord God Almighty is its temple," [Apocal.] namely, of the heavenly city. Thus, therefore, working so that we may deserve to reach the supreme temple, then we shall be able to say joyfully and without falsehood: "The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord it is:" Into which temples may God in His clemency grant a happy entrance.

What Egypt, Babylon, & Damascus. Chapter 34.
[Decorative initial C containing a figure] Since the human race has always been bipartite, namely into the family of God and that of the devil, as Augustine posits in the proem of his volume [August.] 'On the City of God,' and pursues throughout the entire context, it was fitting that in that mysterious and typical region, the sacred scriptures cele-

--- Page 458 ---
CANTICLE ONE

...designate places which would be habitations for both families. And just as Jerusalem with all surrounding places had, without any doubt, been ordained for God's family (concerning which it would be long to narrate in detail), so Egypt, Babylon, and Damascus always sustained that hostile family by which the people of God were often vexed.

Egypt had received a great benefit from the Israelite people, whence Pharaoh called Joseph צפנת פענח Zaphnat pahaneah, which is an Egyptian word found nowhere else in scripture, as Rabbi Salomon says: [Marginal note: Rabbi Salomon.] for which our translation has "savior of the world," but as others wish, it signifies "revealer of secrets": for *zaphan* in Hebrew means "to reveal," but *pahaneah* is purely Egyptian, and signifies "hidden" or "unknown future." But whatever may be about the words, Joseph the Israelite saved Egypt by revealing the secret of the vision, by which those evils had been shown to Pharaoh which were about to come upon his people, thus guarding against them. Nevertheless, Egypt itself oppressed the people for two hundred and ten years, who had descended there under Joseph's auspices. Whence they rightly interpret Egypt, which in Hebrew is called מצרים *Mizraim*, as "distresses" (or "straits"), although some, I know not for what reason, add that it also signifies "darkness": for the Egyptians were always distresses and oppressors of good things.

The Babylonians also, as ministers of God, led captive the best of Jerusalem, their king Jehoiakim also having been transferred to Babylon. Afterwards again they captured King Zedekiah, besieged with his whole army, his sons having been killed, and the temple having been burned: and they held the people captive for seventy years. Damascus also afflicted the people of God many times, but did not lead them into captivity.

Let the difference between these oppressors be noted here, please. Egypt graciously received the people, afterwards afflicted them, and finally dismissed them by force. Babylon led them captive by force, and always acting more mildly, finally dismissed them voluntarily. Damascus, however, harassed them many times without captivity. For Egypt, the oppressor, is the devil, who cunningly receives man, and having received him, subjugates him: nor does he release him, unless he is drawn away by divine power. Babylon is the confusion of the flesh, which, receiving the soul captive, immediately holds it, and confused for seventy years, that is, the common course of human life: But it always acts more leniently, as day by day the soul, which at first was so oppressed that it could understand nothing, is freed from the oppressing and obscuring flesh, so that it may act more freely successively: finally, after the course of life, it is completely liberated, freed from bodily chains. Damascus, however, which is interpreted as "drinking blood," is the world: which feeds only on those things which are according to flesh and blood, sometimes it harasses man, sometimes it dismisses him without harassment: And Damascus is called the head of Assyria, like Assur, which they interpret as "riches," of which, not indeed heavenly but earthly, this world is the head and receptacle.

But the burdens, or pronouncements, or divine sanctions of these places are described by Isaiah: [Marginal note: Isaiah] Which in summary are these: The burden of Egypt, [Marginal note: CHRIST.] that is, of the devil, is that its idols will be moved and will waste away, namely at the coming of Him who said: "Now the prince of this world will be cast out." The burden

--- Page 459 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 160**

The burden of Babylon, that is, of the flesh which confuses the mind, is that every hand, and heart, and corruptible body will be dissolved, and man will be transmuted for the better, more precious than refined gold. The burden of Damascus, that is, of this world, is; because it will cease to be a city, and will be like a heap of stones: For with the inhabitants removed, all the buildings of this worldly city will be destroyed. Many other things, which are said there, could be brought to this meaning, which we omit, lest we proceed further than is fitting.

**What Arabia, Mount Sinai, and Mesopotamia of Syria. Chapter XXXV.**

[Decorative initial H showing two figures]
It was fittingly in Arabia, which rejoices in Mount Sinai, blessed with frankincense and various gums, that the law was given: Nor without mystery did Abraham, full of the Holy Spirit, demand by an oath given from the elder servant of his house, that he should by no means take a wife, except from his own kindred, which was in Mesopotamia of Syria: Whom Isaac followed, and he himself full of God, commanded Jacob, while blessing him, saying: Do not take a wife from the race of Canaan, but go, and proceed to Mesopotamia of Syria, to the house of Bethuel, your mother's brother, and take for yourself thence a wife from the daughters of Laban, your uncle. Concerning the mystery of Arabia, the Apostle says: Abraham had two sons, one by a slave woman, and one [Marginal note: Paul] by a free woman: He who was of the slave woman, was born according to the flesh: But he who was of the free woman, through promise: Which things are spoken by allegory: For these are the two covenants: One indeed on Mount Sinai, generating unto servitude, which is Hagar. Mount Sinai is in Arabia, which is joined to her who is now Jerusalem, and serves with her children. But that Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is our mother. Here it must be noted, how the Apostle says Mount Sinai is contiguous to Jerusalem, when it is distant from it by fifteen days' journeys, with a vast desert interposed. Therefore he does not speak of a local conjunction (because they are separated by a great distance), but of a conjunction of influence, just as the Psalmographer metaphorically says of the dew of Hermon, which descends on Mount Zion, although [Marginal note: David] those mountains are distant by eighty thousand paces. Therefore they are understood to be joined by influence, which is the same on Mount Sinai, where the written law was given, and in Jerusalem, where it was kept with great favor by King David, who amplified the worship of God according to that law itself, and Solomon, who built the temple, and of many prophets, who flourished in Jerusalem and the surrounding places. This law of servitude is figured by the son of the slave woman, who was cast out by Abraham, by God's command, to the wilderness of Beersheba; which is joined to the desert of Arabia: nor is Sinai far from there, where Moses pastured his flock after the desert, as we explained a little earlier. Therefore on this mountain the law of servitude was given to those who came out of Egypt, figured by those who came out of Hagar, the Egyptian slave woman, as the Apostle hints in the words recently adduced. [Marginal note: Paul] And because the same law of servitude was kept in the lower Jerusalem, therefore it is said to be joined with Sinai: because both places were oppressed by the same yoke of servitude, until that new, free Jerusalem descended from above, which is our mother, concerning which John in Revelation says: I saw [Marginal note: John] the holy city, new Jerusalem, descending from heaven, prepared by God as a bride adorned for her husband, that is, to our Father Christ, to whom she was a bride, but to us a mother.

--- Page 460 ---
access was denied,
indeed, it was completely forbidden, as it is said a little further on: "Beware, lest you ascend the
mountain, nor touch its borders: For indeed, whoever touches it, shall surely
die," because they were not yet capable of receiving the influx of powers, just like a sick person who is not
capable of wine and more solid food. Therefore, thirdly, the order of due
progress is mysteriously touched upon, when it is said: "who, having set out from Rephidim, came into the desert, afterwards they en-
camped near Mount Sinai, and finally, having been purified by due sacred rites, they came to the
holy region:" For Rephidim signifies pavements, which are constructed by human
skill: From which place, not without mystery, the people are said to have come to the desert,
afterwards to Sinai, indicating a mysterious progress from Egyptian or worldly
craft: from which whoever withdraws, and is stripped of it, immediately finds a desert, because he is stripped
of favor: But immediately he applies himself to Sinai, where he begins to receive a heavenly influx,
by which, being well imbued, he finally comes to the land in which he can enjoy a fuller
divine showering.

--- Page 461 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 161

that, namely, from which came the queen, full of wisdom and riches, to prove the wisdom of Solomon: who was called Sheba from the place whence she came: For שבא (Sheba) in Hebrew is called Arabia in Latin, and differs from Saba, from which the Sabeans are named, because the latter is written with ס (Samekh), while Arabia is written with ש (Shin). And both are found in the seventy-second psalm, where we say: "the kings of the Arabs, and Saba": in Hebrew it is written מלכי שבא וסבא. But when mention is made of that queen, it is written with ש, from which it is understood that she was the queen of Arabia: Who, although wise, sought greater wisdom in Jerusalem, implying that the law of wisdom given in Arabia flourished with greater wisdom in Jerusalem, especially when it was completed and explained by Him who said: "Behold, something greater than Solomon is here."
Mesopotamia of Syria, which in Hebrew is called Padan Aram, is a place between the Chaldeans and the Canaanites, blessed more by its lineage than by its location: For from there Abraham and the entire Hebrew nation drew their origin from Terah, who had come from Ur of the Chaldeans to Haran, a place and region which was Padan Aram: And from there Abraham proceeded to Canaan, eventually to possess that region, as a worthy inhabitant of that special place.

Therefore Abraham commanded, saying to his son Isaac, and Isaac to Jacob, that they should not take wives from the daughters of Canaan, whom Noah had cursed with all his posterity, saying: "Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be to his brethren." Nor indeed ought a wife be taken from a servile seed for the son of a free woman, or for Jacob, in whose blessing it was said: "Be master of your brethren." Therefore, when the father again repeated the blessing, he said: "Do not take a wife from the daughters of Canaan," as if implying, "If you mix yourself with a cursed and servile seed, you will not be able to obtain the blessing by which it was said, 'Be master of your brethren.'"

And so both were sent, this one by Isaac, and that one by Abraham, to the land and people of their own lineage, which had descended from Shem, the son of Noah, who was by no means cursed, so that from there they might take wives, from whom they would produce offspring who would drive out the cursed ones and possess that entire region occupied by an unjust possessor: In which, so that it might dwell worthily, that family was expiated by law and sacrifices. But if we wish to transcend to a mystical sense, this lineage came out of Ur, that is, from the fire of the Chaldeans and the Babylonian confusion, and a still small family came, namely Terah, Abraham's father, with his son, and Lot, the son of Haran, and Sarai, Abraham's wife, so that they might come to Canaan. But when they had come to Haran, Terah, Abraham's father, died there, unable to reach Canaan. But after he died, it was said to Abraham: "Go out from your land, and from your kindred, or your lineage, and from your father's house, and come to the land which I will show you." By this context we are taught that that family, in order to possess the beautiful and God-beloved region, ought first to depart from the confusion of sin and the fire of concupiscence, and proceed to Haran, which signifies indignation, anger, or zeal, with which one ought to be armed against sin and evil. But care must be taken lest this indignation be excessive and unbridled, so that one does not die there with Terah: But let him correct it with meekness,
                                                                                                                              X

[Marginal note: Psalm 71.]

--- Page 462 ---
CANTICI PRIMI

& let him restrain his anger with Abraham, and with him let him go out from the land of confusion, and from the impetuous progeny, and from the house of the father broken by his own impetuosity, and let him come to me to possess the blessed land, as it is said in the Gospel, whose title is according to-
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
Matthew: Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

What of Amalek, Moab, Ammon, & the Philistines. Chapter XXXVI.

[Decorative initial S]
But since we have dealt somewhat with regions, let us also run through
the peoples beyond those things which have been said concerning the nation of Egypt, Babylon, and Damascus:
For Amalek, Moab, Ammon, and the Philistines were exceedingly hostile to the people of God.
For Amalek was so insolent that the most pious-
[Marginal note: Deuter.]
God said in Deuteronomy: Remember what Amalek did to you on the way, when
you were coming out of Egypt: how he met you, and struck down the stragglers of your
army, who were sitting down weary, when you were exhausted by hunger and labor, and they did not
fear God. Therefore, when the Lord your God has given you rest, and has subdued
all the nations around you, in the land which he promised you, you shall blot out his name
from under heaven: Beware lest you forget. Indeed, the severity of God against this
Amalek seems great, which we believe was not done without mystery: For Amalek
was a great nation, infected with the poison of the ancient serpent, hence an enemy of the family of God: Therefore,
it was always necessary to fight against that one, just as the heavenly rulers of the good family
[Marginal note: Exod.]
contended, as we read in Exodus: כי יד על כס יה מלחמה ליהוה בעמלק מדר דר Which, interpreted
word for word, says: Because a hand is upon the throne of Yah, that is, of God,
fighting for the Lord against Amalek from generation to genera-
[Marginal note: Saul]
tion. Therefore, Saul was cast out from the kingdom with grave indignation: because he was unwilling to conform
himself to the warlike hand of the Lord, and to fight against him, against whom a divine
[Marginal note: Samuel.]
sentence had been passed, and a war declared, as it had been indicated to him by Samuel,
namely, that he should strike and destroy Amalek himself, and all that belonged to him,
killing from man to woman, from infant to suckling, from lamb to sheep,
from camel to ass: because all things were foul, and worthy of no preservation,
and least of all to be offered in sacrifice. Hence Saul's sin was grave, because
he wanted to offer abominable things against the divine precept. But Moses, Joshua, David,
and as many as were found faithful to God, zealous for divine honor, fought
with all their might against this Amalek, although they did not utterly destroy him,
[Marginal note: Numer.]
as the divine sentence had been passed against him, as we read in the book of Numbers: Amalek was the first of the na-
tions, whose end shall be destruction. And this, because it was reserved for the Messiah,
to utterly destroy him, as indeed it was done: nor could it be done by another, but rather
[Marginal note: Moses.]
others, by the virtue of the coming Christ, prevailed against him, just as we read of Moses, who,
having sent soldiers to contend against Amalek, also fought himself with prayers,
with hands lifted up to God: But his hands were heavy, because he did not have the
full power to overcome Amalek. Therefore, those standing by took a stone, on which he sat,
[Marginal note: Paulus]
which, as the Apostle interprets, was Christ, on whom he leaned: And until Christ should
come, who utterly destroyed him, he was supported by Aaron and Hur, that is

--- Page 463 ---
SEVENTH TONE. 151

from the priesthood figuring Christ, and the burning of fire, which he himself came to send among the earth: For Ur is interpreted as a burning, or a furnace. And so that this family of the Amalekites may be shown to be utterly diabolical, it is introduced without a genealogy, just as, conversely, to denote the divinity of Melchizedek, he himself is described without lineage. Also Moab and Ammon, although they were of the lineage of Shem, yet were always hostile to the family of God, and never to be mingled with it. Why then was Ruth the Moabitess admitted not only into the family of God itself, but also into the genealogy of the Savior? This is because that prohibition, which in Deuteronomy commands that eunuchs and those with a mutilated member should not enter the temple of the Lord, except until the tenth generation, and Philistines until the third, was not made for women. But for Moabites and Ammonites, that access is forbidden forever.
[marginal note: Deuteronomy]
Peace and mingling with them are also forbidden as utterly unfruitful, just as can be seen in a plant, whose shoot, if grafted onto the same trunk from which it is torn, produces no fruit at all. Thus, neither can the seed of a son with a mother, nor of a father with a daughter, produce good fruits worthy of the family of God: as happened with the Moabites and Ammonites, who were born from the obscene mingling of daughters with their father. The Philistines, however, came forth from the lineage of Ham along with the Egyptians: For Philistim was the son of Casluhim, and he the son of Mizraim, who is Egypt, and he the son of Ham. This Philistine people, though small, was nevertheless long hostile to the Israelite family, and never destroyed. so much so that some are still considered Philistines, who are called not indeed 'falling' but 'enveloped' or 'enveloping' from פלש *palash*, which means 'to envelop': For with much revolution and varied fortune they fought against Israel, and were enveloped in very many things. But reducing these peoples to a mystical sense, Amalek signifies the devil, against whom a continuous war has been declared for us, as God says: 'I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her seed.'
[marginal note: GOD.]
Moab and Ammon, born of their father Lot, who is interpreted as 'enclosed,' signify the flesh, which is generated from animal spirits and the seminal virtue enclosed in the paternal viscera. The Philistines, however, signify the world, with which we play in continuous revolutions, now freed from it, now again enveloped in it. Hence, against Amalek, and against Moab and Ammon (of whom the first represents the devil, and the latter the flesh), a continuous battle must be waged, and no peace, no concord, no commerce should be had, as commanded by law. With the world, however, sometimes we must fight, and sometimes converse: so that, drawing its lovers away from it, we may lead them into the service of God, just as Christ taught us: who ate and conversed with tax collectors and sinners, so that he might recall them to repentance. We could adduce many other things from natural objects, plants, and stones, mountains, and valleys, particular places, and peoples, through which, as through certain enigmas, the sacred scriptures indicate better things and those pertaining to the spirit. But lest we proceed further than is fitting, let these few suffice out of many.
X ij

--- Page 464 ---
OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

Q. What is that ultimate thing into which all diapasonic consonances converge? The Octave Tone.

[Large decorative initial D]
God fills all things in their state, and with a most sweet life. Ch. I.
Who He is, who fills all things, and what we can know about Him. Ch. II.
All things truly tend towards God. Ch. III.
With what desire they proceed towards Him. Ch. IV.
By what chariot they are carried. Ch. V.
By whom that chariot is drawn. Ch. VI.
What the angelic ministers of God accomplish in this attraction, is confirmed by sacred scripture. Ch. VII.
How all things proceed from God through the number six. Ch. VIII.
How through the number six they return to Him, especially into Christ, who is true rest, and the Sabbath. Ch. IX.
How through the six ages the human race is led back into God Himself. Ch. X.
How a particular man living regularly comes into Christ the Sabbath through six ages signified by those six days. Ch. XI.
Christ is true rest, and the Sabbath. Ch. XII.
Why, when the works of five days were completed, it was said, 'God saw that it was good'; but when the work of the sixth was completed, it was said, 'and they were very good.' Ch. XIII.
The perfect octave is completed in the number eight. Ch. XIV.
That the heavens in their revolution perfectly lead to the octave. Ch. XV.
Concerning the harmony of the heavens, both from the distance and from the consonance of movements. Ch. XVI.
Concerning the consonant fruitfulness in the septenary number of the planets. Ch. XVII.
Concerning the harmonic agreement of the seven planets with the twelve signs. Ch. XVIII.
Concerning the true harmony of the heavens, which some, not understanding, falsely deny. Ch. XIX.
Concerning the concord of the heavens with the supernal minds. Ch. XX.
All things lead to the same, because from the same they receive whence they flow, although the influx may seem diverse. Ch. XXI.

--- Page 465 ---
TONE EIGHT. 163
GOD FILLS ALL THINGS WITH BREATH, AND
a most sweet life. Chapter One.

[Large decorative initial P] AFTER we have shown this earthly home with its guest, arranged with the highest harmony for you, both in enneads and in filled intervals; it remains for us to make its melody heard, which results from the living and unfailing breath of its Maker, who fills all things, in an inexplicable harmony: concerning which Orpheus [says] (Greek: you attune all the heavens with your many-stringed lyre), that is, you attune the whole heaven with your melodious lyre. But going further, Dorylaus Pythagoras says that the world is the instrument of God: Likewise Alexander Milesius with Gregory Nazianzen: The world (he says here) is praiseworthy for each and every species, but much more praiseworthy for the harmony of all, and the structure of the universe, in which there is the highest and most astounding concord from contrariety in the same life and sound, while things are diverse among themselves, and all things agree with each individual part, just as the pipes or strings of an instrument come together in the same sound. Hence the fabric of the world remains (as Timaeus Locrus testifies) most excellent in its very harmony and indissoluble reason. Also one (says Apuleius, emulating those wise men) is the revolution of the earthly sphere, one harmony, and one chorus of stars and other things from diverse occasions and risings: For just as in dances the leader of the song sings a hymn before, and the singing crowd of men and women, with mixed grave and acute cries, resounds one harmony, so the divine mind reveals earthly variations as if they were a single harmony: This co-adaptation and harmony of all things, men (says Augustine in his volume 'On Order') cannot grasp and consider with a weak mind: just as if someone were placed like a statue in the corner of a very spacious and harmonious building, he would not perceive the beauty and harmony of its structure, of which he himself was nevertheless a part, nor can a soldier existing in battle view the order of the entire army: And this is because the soul, dwelling among the lowest things, polluted by the love of inferior beauty, has lost its order and beauty, so much so that it cannot gaze upon the beauty of the universe and the archetype, unless it is again made beautiful and deiform, and recovers its pristine eye, deprived by the thickness of this deadly and darkening gloom: so that, with it purified or recovered, wherever it turns, it may perceive this most harmonious earthly instrument, and, with God modulating, its harmony to be so much sweeter than sound produced by musical arts, as nature and the Maker of nature are more excellent than art itself. If therefore one applies oneself to the first kind of formal music (which Boethius calls "mundane") and inclines one's ears to its foundation, one will perceive in the contrary elements a moderate antiparistasis, and in the things composed from them, a tranquil song led by the highest harmonizer, and
X iij
[Marginal note: Orph.]
[Marginal note: Doryla.]
[Marginal note: Alex. mil.]
[Marginal note: Gre. na.]
[Marginal note: Tim. loc.]
[Marginal note: Apuleius]
[Marginal note: August.]

--- Page 466 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

most sweet. Hence, the supreme craftsman, speaking intimately with Job about such matters, says:
"Where were you when I laid the foundations of the earth? Who determined its measurements, or
who stretched a line upon it, so that all things produced might be weighed and extended with
perfect exactness into due harmony? And upon what were its bases founded?
Or who laid its cornerstone? If you know, declare it: But if not, I will tell you:
This was done by me with such harmony, that the morning stars exulted for joy and sweetness,
and all the sons of Elohim, the craftsman introduced by Moses in the whole creation,
rejoiced: From which, however, divine wisdom, arranging all those things, was not absent,"
[Marginal note: Solomon] whence Solomon, speaking in his person in Proverbs, says: "When he weighed
[small decorative mark] the foundations of the earth, I was with him, arranging all things: and I delighted daily,
playing before him at all times, playing in the world, or as the Hebrew text sounds,
delighting in the harmony of the universe: Whence it follows: And my delights
were with the sons of men." For שעשועים (sha'ashu'im), which we have translated as
"delights," was previously rendered with broad license as "playing."
He continues concerning imperfect mixtures, which are produced from the elements, saying:
"Listen, Job, and consider the marvelous works of God: Do you know when God commanded the rains?
Do you know the paths of the clouds?" And having progressed a little, he says: "Have you entered the treasuries
of snow? Or will you behold the treasuries of hail?" And again: "Who gave a course to the most vehement
rain, and a path to the sounding thunder?" And a little later he adds: "Who is
the father of the rain? Or who begot the drops of dew? From whose womb did the ice come forth?
From heaven, who begot these things?"
Indeed, that Arch-Musician, and the high-sounding God of all,
[Marginal note: August.] who arranges all those things with most sweet harmony and most powerful numbers (as Augustine
says).
Also, the soul, elevated to the middle space of this instrument,
[Marginal notes: Pythag. Tim. Loc. Plato. Ptolem. Pliny Censor.] will perceive with Pythagoras, Timaeus Locrus, Plato, and Ptolemy the harmony of the heavens:
which Pliny and Censorinus describe from their workshop as a diapason
of six tones and seven intervals, which result from the distance of the planets, most harmonious with musical
systems, but which are not intelligible to us (as some think) because of the magnitude
of the sound: or, to speak more truly, because that harmony, pertaining to natural
or formal music, is perceived not by the ear, but by a purified mind, such a great
harmony, that all vocal harmony among us is considered a small example
[Marginal note: Pythag.] (as Pythagoras testifies), concerning which it is again said in Job: "Who will declare the voices
of the heavens, and who will make the harmony of heaven sleep?" Or as the Hebrew text has
it: "Who will expound the clouds in wisdom, or who will make the instrument of the heavens be still?"
No one, indeed: But they will hear (as he had said a little earlier) the sound in the trembling of his voice,
and the tone proceeding from his mouth. Let him hear (he says) with terror the sound of
his voice, that is, of divine wisdom moderating all things, fearing not to be able to correspond
to the sonority of such a great artist, or lest a weak mind be overwhelmed by his glory:
just as, when God spoke to the Israelite people, seized by terror, they said to Moses:
"Speak you, and we will hear: Let not God speak to us, lest we die,"
[Marginal note: Exodus] not being able to bear with weak ears the glory and majesty of the speaker.

--- Page 467 ---
EIGHTH TONE. 164

Whence again Job: [Marginal note: Iob] When we have scarcely heard a small spark of his speech, who will be able to behold the thunder of his greatness? Therefore, just as he fills all things, he makes all things resound, for that reason it follows: Under every heaven is his harmony and modulation: That this may be perceived rather by a better eye than by ears, he prefaced by saying: He extends his light over all the extremities of the earth, by which, of course, these recondite mysteries may be seen by the purified. Therefore, in this great instrument of the universe, he resounds in the voices of his greatness: but wonderful harmonies cannot be comprehended by weak intellects, when a purified mind, not only these lower things, but if it raises its ears to the highest interval of this worldly organ, it will feel the concord, and harmony, or peace, which God made (Job himself being the author) in his sublime places: [Marginal note: Idem] Which should be explained, setting aside error, not about the heavens, but about the angels: Whence he then adds: Is there a number of his soldiers, or of his troops, over whom his light does not rise, or his eye scrutinizing all things, numbering all things, and fitting them together: so that they themselves, together with the celestial circles, by running through with the most modulated succession and most ordered turns, with a singular variety, may complete a most consonant course? Who, now with heat, now with cold, now with moisture, now with dryness, and with many kinds of influences, by suffusing the earth, render it now despoiled, now adorned with flowers and herbs, and fruits according to the quality and opportunity of the seasons, always reducing it to the same (yet with continuous succession): so that the unique moderator of all things, at whose nod all things are most clearly arranged in turn, just as notes or strings, moved by the same resonating force in a certain succession, produce one harmony, indicating a unique leader of the song. If again we direct our ears to the singers and those chanting in this psalmody, we will perceive him, the high-sounding one, making all things resound with a certain proportion (says Albertus) [Marginal note: Albert.] discovered by the Creator's wisdom, nor devised by any intelligence from itself, but drawn from the fount of super-mundane wisdom: For if there is a temperament of the parts of the body, which is called health, is this not from him, who from the beginning arranged all things very good and temperate, and again, by tempering dissonant things, makes them sound? Hence the Psalmist sings: He sent his word, and [Marginal note: Dauid] healed them. And if the affections of animals lacking reason agree among themselves, and for their necessary pasture, did not the artificer of nature instill this, that like things delight to dwell with like things, and having rejected harmful foods, they take for themselves suitable ones prepared by him? About these things Job continues, saying: Who prepares food for the raven, when [Marginal note: Iob] its young cry to God, wailing, because they have no food? With whom the royal prophet sings: Who gives food to all flesh, namely, that which is suitable for it. [Marginal note: Dauid] If also those using reason are fitted together in morals, does not he do this, about whom again it is sung in the psalms: Who makes those of one mind dwell in a house? If again harmonious people gather in a city or some republic, is this not from him, who through angels of peace commanded peace to be announced and given to people of good will: and who, through his apostles and messengers, commanded peace to be offered to all who wish to receive it, into whatever city, house, or place they enter? If with ready,
X iiij

--- Page 468 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...also with what spirit some undertake the burden of the law, by which, being moderated, they are admitted, like well-arranged pipes, into the super-celestial instrument and most sweet ethereal harmony—is this not from Him, of whom it is said: "No one comes to me unless my Father has drawn him?"
[Marginal note: CHRIST]
But if any with a sincere heart adhere to the attracting or calling mellifluous sweetness, is this not from Him, who again says: "My yoke is sweet, and my burden is light?"
[Marginal note: The Same]
Which He had confirmed, who said: "How good is God to Israel, to those who are of a right heart."
[Marginal note: David]
And this is that peace and harmony, towards which we strive: which surpasses all understanding. Behold therefore, the same one, personified in all, flowing into all, causes all things to resound with His vivifying and deifying power. But who this precentor may be, or what knowledge we can have of Him, must be explored.

**Who this one is, who completes all things, and what we can know about Him. Chapter II.**
**T**hat there is a being, from whom all things have proceeded, who completes all things, and towards whom, as a beloved and pre-elected end, all these same things tend, is doubtful to no one: And that this same one is called God by all, though by different names according to the diversity of languages. But this is He,
[Marginal note: Isaiah]
who says through Isaiah: "I am He, I am the first, and I am the last: My hand founded the earth, and my right hand measured, or enclosed the heavens with a span." The "I" is repeated three times, not without mystery (as the Hebrew text has it), to denote that some Trinity is contained in that supreme unity. Therefore I (He says) am He, who indeed is from Himself: or I am that which is: as the Hebrew words clearly sound. It follows: "And I am the first, and the origin of all things: and I am the last and the end, towards whom all things tend:" And as the first efficient cause, with my hand I founded the earth, the stable foundation of the whole machine which was built upon it or around it: And with my right hand I measure, order, direct, or enclose all things with a span, calling and drawing them to myself, from whom all these things have proceeded: whence it follows: "I call them, and they stand together," that is, gathered into myself: But who, how great, or of what kind this God may be, since He escapes all human comprehension, it will be difficult, indeed impossible, to investigate:
[Marginal note: Paul]
because He dwells (as Paul testifies) in inaccessible light, whom no man has seen, nor can see: This was not hidden from those ancient fathers, who constantly asserted that two supreme divine measures or dignities, of which they call the higher one the fount, crown, origin, from which indeed all things emanate, and the other wisdom, the firstborn, and by many other appropriate names, were not known to mortals, nor even to Moses himself: who (as they say) did not even enter the fiftieth gate of the preceding measure. Therefore no one could understand the Father or the Son, until He came, who said: "No one knows the Son except the Father, nor does anyone know the Father except the Son, and he to whom the Son wills to reveal Him."
[Marginal note: John]
Likewise, John also says: "No one has ever seen God; but the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He has declared Him to us."
[Marginal note: Job]
Which Job also touched upon under the name of light, saying: "Tell me, if you know, in what way light dwells:"
[Marginal note: James]
That light, indeed, which by James is called the Father of lights, and that which di-

--- Page 469 ---
TOMVS OCTAVVS. 165

he said: I am the light of the world. Concerning which again John [says]: The life was the light of men, & the light [Ioannes]
shines in the darkness, & the darkness did not comprehend it. Which also Job, following [this thought], [Iob]
says: Their light will be taken away from the wicked: Which is communicated to all, so that it may illuminate every
human being, provided that it is not obscured by their own darkness, & that one does not render oneself unworthy of such great light:
Indeed, by this light alone can God, & divine things be perceived. If, therefore,
any knowledge is to be had concerning this precentor, & delightful harmony, & beatifying end, &
rest, it is necessary that it proceeds from this light: nor can we expect it from the wise
of the world, who are enveloped in the darkness of their own inventions, as Paul testifies, who says: [Paulus]
We speak God's wisdom in a mystery, which has been hidden, which God predestined before the ages for our glory: & which
none of the rulers of this age knew: For neither the end, nor the means by which
one arrives at that same end, or at the sweetest harmony between God & man, by which
man himself is made blessed, has any philosopher, or wise person of the world ever taught:
because the natural man, or the wisdom of the world, which is carnal, does not perceive the things that are of the Spirit of God, as the Apostle continues: And adding the reason, he says: [Idem]
For who among men knows the things of a man, except the spirit of the man which is in him?
So also the things of God no one has known, except the Spirit of God. Therefore we have not received the spirit
of this world, but the Spirit who is from God: so that we may know the things that have been
given to us by God, who also speak not in words taught by human wisdom, but in the teaching
of the Spirit, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. For there is a threefold progress in knowledge
especially celebrated among the Peripatetic philosophers: the resolutive or defining, the dividing, & the composing:
None of which pertains to God, who can neither be defined, nor divided, nor composed.
Hence, Peripatetic theology is too diminished, & that doctrine is less sufficient for divine things,
which are perceived by a pure intellect, or by a purified spirit. Therefore, another method must be sought by us, by which
we may receive divine things. For there is one, and that a sublime one, which is called intuitive, when
man with a pure heart & eye looks into those clear & eternal mirrors, & spectacles:
to which all the prophets arrived, and hence were rightly called seers. Thus Isaiah,
wishing to explain what he had perceived, said: The vision of Isaiah: And again: I saw the Lord [Isaias.]
sitting upon a high, & exalted throne. Thus Ezekiel, indicating whence he had [Ezechi.]
what he announced, said: The hand of the Lord was upon me, & I saw. Similarly
& Daniel says: I saw in my vision. To this degree all the [Daniel]
prophets had arrived, although they saw different things: Whom John, Paul,
Stephen, & other apostolic men followed, of whom the first says: We have seen his glory: And
the last spoke concerning himself: Behold, I see the heavens opened, & Jesus standing at the right hand [Stephan.]
of the power of God. But the middle one testifies that he saw, & heard the secrets of God, which it is not
lawful for a man to utter: because neither do words suffice, nor are mortals, wallowing in the mire of filth,
considered worthy to receive precious pearls, & splendor, by which defiled eyes are rather
offended, than enlightened. There is therefore a progress, &
a middle way of knowing, between this intuitive [method], & those Peripatetic modes: which

X v.

--- Page 470 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

I would rightly consider all as one, namely, the agreement of the truths which those who saw announced, to our intellect, which is capable of all truths; whence the passible intellect is so called, that is, receptive of all intelligibles, nay, most desirous of all truths: This intellect, when purified, while it assents to declared truth and rests in it, acquires for itself a great judgment, that it is true, that which so well fits with its own intellect, just as a key with a lock, which if it does not fit the mechanism of the lock itself, is proven not to be that key; but if it fits, it passes through, opens, and closes, and is judged to be its own: No less so, the meaning or interpretation of anything announced by the prophets, if it fits a purified intellect without any disagreement, is proven true; but if not, false and not its own. This, therefore, is the way to be sought by us, who cannot, like the prophets and apostles, intuit divine things, so that we may obtain understanding and interpretation of the scriptures, which those who saw with a true eye what they say, have set forth: We shall long declare that interpretation true, when it has been balanced and harmonious with our purified intellect.

Therefore, with this truth and doctrine, we have said that blessed God was not only the maker of this machine (as we discussed at the beginning) and the end towards which all things tend, as we shall immediately declare, but that He is the one who, filling all things, makes all things resound around Him, [Marginal note: Jer. 23.] just as He declares with an outstretched voice in Jeremiah, saying: "Do I not fill heaven and earth?" namely, with spirit, voice, and harmonious power, and glory [Marginal note: Isaiah]: as Isaiah testifies he saw, when he says: "I saw, and the house was full," namely, the heavenly house, with His majesty, and those things which were beneath Him filled that exalted temple. [Marginal note: Haggai] But the Maker, not content with that fulfillment, promises through the prophet Haggai, at the coming of the Messiah, that He will better fulfill the same, saying: "The desired of all nations will come, and I will fill this house with glory [Marginal note: Isaiah]." And lest the earth be thought empty of His majesty, the Seraphim are introduced, having first uttered the Trisagion, crying out: "The whole earth is full of His glory [Marginal note: Ezek.]." Ezekiel also, when he treated of the earthly and heavenly wheel, or of the ophanim, through whom the elemental wheels are arranged, adds: "The spirit of life was in the wheels." He also adds that he heard the sound or voice of the animals of holiness, by whom the wheels or ophanim following them were governed. "And I heard," he says, "the sound of their wings, like the sound of many waters, like the sound of the sublime God, or שדי Shaddai, as the Hebrew truth has it." He says he heard a sound in the wings of the animals, which he made with the wheels or ophanim, like the sound of waters, from which, as from a seminal power, all things are produced. And since all things are from God, therefore he says "as the sound" or "voice of Shaddai," which we sometimes interpret as "the Almighty," sometimes "God of heaven," but here we have it interpreted as "the sublime God," although perhaps we could better interpret it as "sufficient cause" or "God fully operating [Marginal note: David]." For He is the one of whom it is sung in the psalm: "When You open Your hand, all things will be filled with goodness." And again: "The earth is filled with Your possession and Your influence." Therefore, in His absence, all things are disturbed and return to their dust. But if all things remain filled, although they succeed one another in a reciprocal transformation,

--- Page 471 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 166**

they do not, however, deviate from their harmony, but by their succession, just as sound in an organ, with the succeeding turns of fingers and hands, the modes remaining untouched, as it is said in the Book of Wis- [Marginal note: Sapien.] dom: For when the elements are transformed in themselves, just as the sound of quality is changed in an organ, yet all things preserve their own sound. These things are found at the end of the book: also at the beginning it is said: The Spirit of the Lord has filled the whole world: and that which contains all things has knowledge of a voice. Where we are taught, not only that the Spirit of God fills all things with harmonious sound, but also to give to man, the leader, from which he may perceive that very harmony, saying: that man, who contains all things, and has knowledge of that voice and harmony, provided, of course, that he is spiritual and has become capable of that very spirit. There are almost infinite passages of sacred scripture by which we could confirm our proposition, but these suffice, so that we may now turn to outsiders, who, seeing these fathers, emulated them: Of whom the chief ones, Pythagoras and Plato, having been taught by this kind of [Marginal note: Pythag. Plato] tradition, with their Academics teach that the divine spirit is infused into all things: Which some called the soul of the world, others the spirit of God: whom the Poet, imitating them, sings.
A spirit nourishes within, and a Mind, infused through all its limbs, [Marginal note: Virgilius] stirs the mass, and mingles itself with the great body: From this come the race of men and beasts, and the life of flying creatures, and the monsters which the sea bears beneath its marble surface. Fiery is their vigor, and heavenly their origin.
In the same sense Manilius sings, saying: [Marginal note: Manil.]
For they sing of a powerful mind of silent nature, and God infused into the earth, heaven, and sea.
Orpheus, Alexander Milesius, and Dorylaus agree on the same point, as we touched upon above: [Marginal note: Orph. Alexand. Doryla. Boëtius] From the workshop of all of whom Boëtius says:
You, connecting the soul that moves all things, through harmonious members, resolve the middle of triple nature: Which, divided, gathered motion into two circles, and, destined to return into itself, it goes, and circles the profound mind, and turns the heaven with a similar image.
And Aratus sings under the name of Jove: [Marginal note: Aratus]
Life of the elements, heat of the world, fire of the ether, and vigor of the stars, perpetual substance of light, and the number of lofty harmony.
Alexander Milesius the Pythagorean also says: [Marginal note: Alexan:] That soul, which is called Jupiter, that is, the Most High God, invigorates and fills all things, and, stirring heaven as a kind of lyre, produces celestial harmony. And Trismegistus, the splendor of philosophers, [Marginal note: Trism:] in that book whose title is, "That God is at once hidden and manifest," says: Thus, for God to exist always, unless He always acts in all things, is impossible: namely, in heaven, in the air, earth, sea, in the whole world, in every single particle of the world, then in that which

--- Page 472 ---
**CANTICLE THE FIRST**

...exists, and in that which does not exist. There is nothing in all nature that He Himself is not: He is indeed what exists: He is also what is least of all: What indeed exists, He brings into light, and what does not exist, He hides within Himself. This God, better than any name, this hidden one, this again most manifest of all, this visible to the mind, this present to the eyes, this incorporeal, this (if I may so speak) multicorporeal: For there is nothing in bodies that He Himself is not: For He alone exists in all things, as
[Marginal note: Parme.] Parmenides also taught, whom
[Marginal note: Aristo.] Aristotle unjustly tries to refute. And the same
[Marginal note: Mercur.] Mercurius (Trismegistus) concerning the Common (Universe): Nor is there anything in the whole (universe) that is not God Himself: according to that saying of
[Marginal note: Orphe.] Orpheus recited by
[Marginal note: Euseb.] Eusebius:
Jupiter is the highest peak, and the lowest foundation:
He is eternal always at once, and wholly everywhere
The foundation of the Earth. And again:
Jupiter is whatever you see, wherever you move. And many other things, which
[Marginal note: Anaxa.] he pursues in several poems. I omit what
[Marginal note: Democr.] Anaxagoras, Democritus,
[Marginal note: Zeno.] Zeno,
[Marginal note: Theop.] Theophrastus,
[Marginal note: Hiarch.] Hierchas with his Brahmans (according to
[Marginal note: Philost.] Philostratus),
[Marginal note: Plato.] very many Platonists,
[Marginal note: Orige.] Origen, and many others wrote about such things: And I will conclude
[Marginal note: Diony:] with Dionysius, who explains almost everything that they handed down and proved with many reasons, in a single conclusion: They say that God is in minds, and in living beings, and in bodies, and in heaven, and on earth, and at the same time in the same (place), the same worldly, circum-worldly, supra-worldly, super-celestial, super-substantial, sun, star, fire, water, spirit, dew, cloud, the very stone, and rock, all existing things, and nothing of existing things. And thus, filling all things, He makes all things resound.

Truly all things tend towards God. Chapter III.

<span style="font-size: 200%;">F</span>abric this universal, the motion of the spheres, the successive generation and corruption of things, all of which are circular, bear the trace of the Creator: by which we are taught that, just as God is to Himself the beginning and the end, and a complete sphere, so all things which hold His likeness tend towards the same (source) from which they proceeded: For this is proper to each: as
[Marginal note: Ecclesia] Ecclesiastes says concerning rivers: "To the place from which they go forth, the rivers return, that they may flow again." So also concerning the earthly body, the Creator said to sinful man: "Dust you are, and
[Marginal note: Genesis] to dust you shall return." Which also Solomon himself teaches all things do, saying:
[Marginal note: Salomon] "All things go to one place; all things that are made of earth, and to earth they equally return." And let these things be said of earthly matters. But concerning the two parts of man,
[Marginal note: Idem] he continues at the end of the volume, saying: "The dust returns to its earth, from whence it was, and the spirit returns to God who made it." For this (spirit) which is from God, freed from the body, immediately returns to the same (God), unless it is detained by violent impediment: But the earthly part is returned to the earth, from which it immediately proceeded. And since the earth is from God, who created it, and it, following the due order with all things sprouting from it, must at some time return to God. He who moves all things,
[Marginal note: Aristot:] and draws all things into Himself (says Aristotle with his Peripatetics) as a heart—

--- Page 473 ---
TOMVS OCTAVVS. 167

desired, and greatly beloved by all with a love and longing innate by nature: Who, proceeding also by a mathematical path, had previously said that all things are reduced to one, just as they had proceeded from one. Which the Academics (especially Proclus in his Theological Elements) most clearly teach. Thus, and not without a small mystery, the Hebrew characters signifying numbers proceed in the same order: For א (Aleph) is a character signifying one, but with the complete progression through all characters, some of which signify units, some tens, some hundreds, one arrives at last at the same א (Aleph) which, pronounced by saying Aleph, signifies the millenary complement of all numbers, and the cube of the supreme number ten: so that just as the character itself signifies one, so when pronounced it signifies a thousand: and the same character also signifies the same with an added point א̇: But this Aleph also signifies a leader, and is the seal of the highest crown, or of the supreme Father, containing in its figure two י (Yods) and one ו (Vav), which letters in numbers yield 26, like the great four-letter name of God. Therefore, with great mystery, that which represents the divine name in numbers contained by a certain hidden mystery, in the simple character itself signifies the one God, and the first principle of all, and in its pronunciation, the end of numbers. But another sacrament must be observed in that great name of God: in which all the letters signify circular numbers: For י (Yod) gives ten, ה (He) five, and ו (Vav) six: which are all and solely circular numbers: so that it is intimated that God is the true sphere: and proceeds in every spherical progression, reducing all things into Himself, just as they had proceeded from Him: which is testified by Isaiah [Marginal note: Isaias] saying: "I am the first, and the last: my hands founded all things, ordering them, namely, into Myself, so that they might follow a spherical order." Whence this mass of created things cannot tend towards anything else, except towards Him whose image it holds. Moreover, all lines of a circle proceeding from the center to the circumference, and from it to the center, denote that all creatures emanating from the center of the supreme sphere tend towards the circumference of the same sphere, as to their end: And just as the same lines never exceed the limits of the sphere or circle, so too creatures do not exceed the boundaries of that divine sphere: so much so that they are from Him, and in Him they remain, and towards Him they tend: Just as all accidents depend on substance, which is their subject and support, so all created things, which are like accidents with respect to the first and supreme being, which is from itself, depend on Him from whom they depend: and in whom they are contained as in a support: and in whom they were, before they were unfolded into their proper forms, and to Him they look, and tend as to their proper place and home: whence without Him, like strangers, they cannot long remain: but strive to return to Him, especially man: who contains all things by virtue and power, as Trismegistus teaches: Who, dying, as reported by Chalcidius, said: "Hitherto, my son, driven from my homeland, I have lived as a stranger and an exile: [Marginal note: Trism. Calcid.] now unharmed I seek my homeland again: And when shortly I depart from you, freed from the bonds of the body,"

--- Page 474 ---
**CANTICI PRIMI**

[Marginalia: Didym⁹. Hiarchas Porphy. Procul. Plato. Iambli. Porphy. Paulus]
see to it that you do not mourn me as if dead: For I am returning to that most excellent and blessed
city, to which all citizens will come by the summons of death: For there
God alone is the supreme prince, who fills his citizens with wondrous
sweetness, so that this [life], which many consider life, ought rather to be called death, than
life. To this opinion come Didymus, Hiarchas, Porphyrius, Proculus,
in their treatises on prayers and supplications: where it is taught, concerning the mind of Plato, Iamblichus, and Por-
phyry, that prayers are necessary, so that through them we may be led back to our homeland, from which, as long
as we are here, we wander as strangers, says Paul: Who, disputing with the Hebrews, openly
says: "We do not have here an abiding city, but we seek the one to come."
And to conclude briefly, all those whose lights have been enlightened come to this opinion.

**By what appetite they proceed to the same [goal]. Chapter IV.**

[Decorative initial D] All have asserted that there are two appetites in things: natural, and
free: But in man (if I am not mistaken) we could add a third,
which is external and supernatural, and divine, drawing by its
effect, and leading to the performance of divine, meritorious works pleasing to God himself.
And that is what always aspires to the best things, not
indeed a natural discourse, as very many think, but that higher part,
[Marginalia: Plotinus.] which Plotinus calls intellect, distinct from the rational faculty: By which we mediately understand God
and divine things: and we tend towards Him in mind and deed: as he discusses
at length in his work 'On Man'. And this [intellect], residing in the citadel of the soul, always resists the law,
which is in our members, leading to what natural virtue and affection can least
[Marginalia: Paulus] accomplish. This, therefore, is 'I', but that is 'grace', according to the teaching of the Apostle, who
says: "Not I, but the grace of God with me." This divine [part], therefore, tends towards the best and divine things:
But that inferior and animal part of us always draws towards the lowest things, from matter
most distant from the supreme. But our soul, or rational faculty, is in the middle, now
carried here, now there: or adhering now to this, now to that, by indecision, or by the choice of the will,
although by its own nature it tends towards that principle from which it proceeded, unless
[Marginalia: Boetius] matter, the mother of error, distracts it: as that common saying of Boethius is apt: "There is
in the minds of men a certain desire for the true good, but wandering error leads them astray to false things."
Which is either from matter (as we said) drawing to the lowest things, or from corporeal
images and manifold present objects distracting: For a present
and sensible object more strongly moves a man who is still natural, and one who
does not have senses trained for the discernment of good and evil: and who does not
taste true honey, milk, and butter, so that he may know how to reject evil and choose good.
He who does not hear what the Lord God speaks within him, nor tastes, nor sees,
[Marginalia: Paulus] nor feels, nor perceives (as the Apostle says) the things that are of God, being a natural man himself:
but is enticed by the allure of these apparent goods, which are shadows of the true ones.

--- Page 475 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 168

as the wise say, especially Plato in the Republic and in many places, and as sacred scriptures [marginal note: Plato]
everywhere resound, these things ought to be despised as dregs and shadows, indeed as deadly poison:
as the Supreme Truth admonishes with an clear voice, saying: "Do not store up for [marginal note: CHRIST]
yourselves treasures on earth, which moth destroys, and thieves steal, and rust
consumes, subject to every devastation; because they are corruptible, full of dregs, and shadowy.
But store up for yourselves true, permanent, stable,
and perfect treasures in heaven." And Paul considered all these shadowy things as dung, [marginal note: Paul]
so that he might acquire better ones, and go there, from where he came. Thus all, whoever
have purified lights, and are not distracted by burdensome matter, diligently
strive to arrive at the same place, with the highest good calling and attracting them to itself: as
is clear in the vast field of sacred scripture: Whom indeed sometimes it impels either by their own
virtue, or through faithful ministers; and draws by force, as it is said in the Gospel, which is titled [marginal note: Luke]
according to Luke: "Compel them to come in."

On what course they are carried. Chapter V.

**A**LL those things which have no free movement ascend no other
course by which they are carried to the first (principle), from which they departed, except
instinct, which they call natural, because it is implanted by nature, as the
Peripatetics say, or (to use their words) because it happens in many cases and [marginal note: Peripate:]
frequently: For thus they defined natural things. But, as the truth of the matter is, they were thus endowed by the Supreme Creator.
But those who are partakers of reason and liberty by God's gift,
these ascend the course of their will, or of love, according to that saying of Augustine: [marginal note: August.]
"My love is my weight, or my course; I am carried there where I love." To this, however,
with nature often contributing great force and divinity attracting, they run more
easily: For to the progress of wisdom and doctrine come more readily men
well-strung in body, and endowed with a good soul, and disposed to doctrine,
with Phoebus, Venus, and Mercury favoring them, if we wish to follow the Platonists. And [marginal note: Platoni.]
this either by disposing the body, or because the intelligences presiding over them favor them with their
influence, or (as the Pythagoreans say) because in descending the soul takes on the [marginal note: Pythag.]
nature of those intelligences, just as light seems to take on the color of the glass through which
it passes, be it red, blue, green, or yellow. Others run more easily to dominion,
if birth and virtue grant it; and if the Sun, and Mars, and such like have
favored them: if what the Astronomers teach is true. Others run to diverse virtues by a [marginal note: Astron.]
natural course, according to the varied disposition of body, and mind, and the favoring sky;
but they attain nothing good, unless the supernal virtue favors them, from which comes all good: For
wisdom is not acquired by one's own strength, as testifies he who is rightly called wise
by surname: "And I applied my heart to know wisdom; and I understood that man [marginal note: Solomon]
cannot find the reason for any of the works of the Lord that are done under the
sun; and the more he labors to inquire, the less he will find." And this is because
wisdom is given by God, according to the saying of James: "If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask [marginal note: James]
of the Lord, who gives to all generously, and alone gives." Nor to come to dominion

--- Page 476 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

[Marginal notes:]
Paul
Dionysius
CHRIST.

The same
Paul
Joram

Isaiah

Eunuch.
Philip.

Psalm

Jerome.

John.

who will be able, unless God grants it, as Paul says, and with him Dionysius the Platonist in his volume on the kingdom: There is no power except from God. But also the supreme Truth itself says to the Roman prelate: You would have no power over me, unless it were given to you from above. Nor is man able for any good work without divine favor, as He Himself everywhere declares, saying: Without me you can do nothing. And he, in whose breast Christ Himself resonated, says: We are not sufficient to think anything of ourselves, as if from ourselves: but all our sufficiency is from God.

Hence Joram (as we read in the fourth volume of Kings), trusting in his own strength, having scorned divine oracle and favor, ascended a war chariot to engage with the Assyrians, by whom he was wounded by an arrow shot at random between the stomach and the lung, or between the chest and the breastplate, as the literal truth has it, and fell from the chariot in a miserable accident: These things are not without mystery: For he falls from the chariot of his own strength, in which he trusted: he is wounded between two artifacts woven by human ingenuity, to signify that the weaving, and every work conceived by human cunning, or labored by ingenuity and one's own strength, is frustrated: and is turned to the ruin of the one laboring without divine favor, as He speaks with a clear voice through Isaiah, saying: Woe to the rebellious children, that you would take counsel, but not from me: and weave a web, but not by my spirit: that sin might be added to sin: Who walk to go down into Egypt, that is, to inferior virtues and cunning: and you have not asked my mouth, nor sought my favor, hoping for help in the strength of Pharaoh: who is interpreted as 'uncovering' or 'scattering,' and signifies that most cunning and naked serpent who by his cunning scattered the human race, and stripped the first-formed, so that he would blush before the face of the Lord. It follows: And the strength of Pharaoh shall be to you for confusion, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt for ignominy.

Therefore, he labors in vain who thinks to attain divine things by natural course or inferior favor: Which we can confirm with the example of the eunuch of Queen Candace, who was reading Isaiah in his chariot with vain labor, until, by the command of the Holy Spirit, Philip joined himself to that chariot, teaching what he could not understand: and providing light, and a sign of faith: so that from then on he could do what he was not able to do before: And then by the presence and favor of Philip, indeed of the Holy Spirit sending and assisting, that chariot became like that of which it is said in the psalm: The chariots of God are ten thousands, thousands of those rejoicing. Indeed, to the divine chariot, for the favor of those ascending it, there is present not only the Holy Spirit, but many thousands of ministering powers, called ten thousands hyperbolically, as Jerome says. Therefore, these are present, joined to those assisting and working, and sometimes they advance the chariot, as we shall say immediately: Which chariot of God is of many kinds: One of which Peter had ascended, the other John, as it is said in the Gospel: They ran two together, but he [Peter] in the chariot of faith, this one [John] truly of charity: Which, being fiery, therefore leads more swiftly: Whence it follows: But he who was younger ran more quickly than Peter: Not indeed because he was younger, but because he was more fervent in love. Peter, however, entered the tomb first: because the first gate

--- Page 477 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 169**

through which entry is given to the risen Christ, to the coming age, and to God, is faith, as Paul says: [Marginal note: Paul] It is necessary for one approaching God to approach through faith: Once this is possessed, the course in charity becomes very swift: And sometimes in a fiery chariot with horses of fire, upon which fervent Elijah ascended when he returned to God, from whom he had proceeded: Feeling that fire, and at the same time the fragrance of the beloved breathing that warmth into us, we will immediately say: [Marginal note: David] We run in the odor of your perfumes. And again with the prophet: I have run the way of your commandments, for you have enlarged my heart.

From whom this chariot is drawn. Chapter VI.

**S**INCE this chariot is of God, it is necessary that it also be drawn by divine power, because an inferior power would not suffice: Therefore, the highest Truth says: [Marginal note: CHRIST] No one comes to me unless my Father has drawn him: Knowing this, he who obtained the name of the wise man by a special privilege, [Marginal note: Solomon] said: Draw me after you. Indeed, he draws in two ways, as he says through Hosea in plain speech: [Marginal note: Hosea] I will draw you with cords of a man, with bands of love: The cords of men pertain to the humanity of the Messiah, but the bands of love to his divinity: Did not Christ as man attract us by his presence, doctrine, prayer, manifold example, and various works, especially those which he suffered for us in flesh and body? Did he not also attract by a certain divine power? Feeling this, Peter said: You have the words of eternal life; to whom shall we go? And again: You are Christ, [Marginal note: Peter] the Son of the living God. Therefore, embracing at the same time the bonds of humanity and divinity, especially at the end, where acting in an orderly manner he usually operates more powerfully, he said: [Marginal note: CHRIST] When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all things to myself. And so truly did he draw to himself, that for many years, those whom he had bound with love, he led fearlessly to every kind of martyrdom. But he also granted this power of drawing to his apostles and legates, when he said: Come after me, I will make you become fishers of men, so that you may draw them into the net of the word of God. And he also taught them in what part they should cast the net [Marginal note: The Same] after the resurrection, not without mystery, saying: [Marginal note: The Same] Cast the net on the right side of the boat: In which right side are charity, piety, love, mercy, kindness, and other things of that kind; but on the left are fear, terror, threat, severe justice, punishment, and similar things. Hence hinting that the divine preacher ought to attract souls more by soothing than by terrifying, and rather by bonds of charity than of terror, as he himself did with the adulteress, the sinner, the publican, the tax collector, and such, leading them with kindness, and not terrifying them with threats. And although sometimes the divine orator ought to announce their crimes to the people with a loud voice, nevertheless he ought to do it not by reproaching, but by admonishing with charity, proposing those things which are prepared by the rectitude of justice for their crimes. Therefore, casting their nets into this part, those Apostles were unable to draw them in because of the multitude of fish, so that we may be taught how great a harvest is made in love and charity. Nor without reason is it added: And though there were so many, the net was not torn: because virtue and the office of preaching in

Y

--- Page 478 ---
CANTICLE ONE

...charity exhibited, with God's help, is strengthened and corroborated, so that it cannot be broken or torn apart; [Paulus] but it can accomplish all things, according to that saying of the Apostle: "I can do all things in him who strengthens me." Angels also draw, and ministering spirits, so that they may carry out those things which the highest ruler commands, as it is said of them in the psalm: [Psalmus] "Bless the Lord, all his angels, his ministers, who do his will," not only among men, but moving all things, and influencing in all things, however small. Hence we see many things stirred up and working beyond that which their nature provides; and mortals, not knowing whence these things happen, wonder. This, however, happens in many ways: For sometimes they anticipate, by a certain prescience and movement, those things which are to come to man, as we can prove from the most weighty external and Catholic authors, and by the clearest experience. [Cicero] Cicero relates in the first book of 'On Divination' that for the Lacedaemonians, a little before the Leuctrian disaster, arms sounded in the temple of Hercules: [Calisth.] But at the same time in Thebes (as Callisthenes says), in the temple of Hercules, doors closed with bars opened by themselves; and arms, which had been fixed to the walls, were found on the ground. And at the same time, by many signs, the Lacedaemonians were announcing the calamities of the Leuctrian battle: For on the head of the statue of Lysander, who was the most famous of the Lacedaemonians, which stood at Delphi, a crown suddenly appeared, made of rough and wild herbs: And golden stars, which had been placed at Delphi by the Lacedaemonians after that naval victory in which the Athenians fell, a little before the Leuctrian battle, fell down, and were not found. [Ioseph] Why should I mention those many portents recounted by Josephus which preceded the Jerusalem disaster suffered under Titus and Vespasian? The moon for many days seemed to suffer an unusual eclipse, sympathizing with the future ruin: Lightning for half an hour, as if it were midday, surrounded the temple: Its bronze gate, which was scarcely moved by twenty men, at the sixth hour of the night, opened of its own accord: Chariots and an army of armed men seemed to be carried around the region with great impetus: [Euseb.] All these things Eusebius of Caesarea confirms in the third book of his 'Ecclesiastical History'. And to briefly conclude, almost all significant disasters have been preceded by some portents and prodigies from God's ministers. [Myda Cicero] Many also were preceded by signs at their birth, as Cicero relates in the same place concerning the boy Midas, to whom, while sleeping, ants carried grains of wheat into his mouth, an omen said to be of [Plato] great riches, which came to pass. But when bees settled on the lips of Plato, sleeping in his cradle, it was answered that he would be of singular sweetness of speech; thus his future eloquence was anticipated in the infant: Which we read happened to Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, in our histories. To Hecuba, wife of Priam, about to give birth to Paris, it seemed that she gave birth to a burning torch, which would set Troy and all Asia ablaze. [Heracl.] To the mother of Phalaris (as Heraclitus Ponticus, a student of Plato, writes), it seemed that a statue of Mercury poured blood onto the ground, with which the whole house overflowed: Which offered a sign of immense cruelty in the son she was bearing. [Philistus] To the mother of Dionysius (as Philistus says), while pregnant, it seemed that she gave birth to a satyr. But to the mother of Clare of Assisi, a gardener, not only did it seem, but by a clear voice of a sign

--- Page 479 ---
VOLUME EIGHT. 170

by a clear voice it was signified, that she should safely give birth to a very bright light. The portent, which was at the birth of John the Baptist, is known to all: by which it is proven what angels do with us, both by anticipating and celebrating birth: although among the gentiles evil angels were at work. To the father Zacharias, Gabriel appeared: Speech is withheld from the unbeliever: the barren woman is made fruitful: when the boy is born, speech is restored to the silent father: so that the neighbors and those aware of the events were compelled to exclaim in wonder, "What do you think this boy will be?" Ascending to older examples, Isaac is anticipated by a most famous oracle: he is conceived by a barren and old woman: he is begotten by an old man: His son Jacob quarrels with his brother in his mother's womb: from which the parents are taught by a divine oracle that two nations are contained in that maternal womb. The ancient legislator is exposed to be killed by the river and reeds: and is taken up by Pharaoh's daughter not by chance, but by God's arrangement: who, through his angel, led her to that place, so that the boy might be saved, and be called Moses, i.e., 'taken from the waters,' and who, by angelic favor, would continuously be the leader of that most famous and celebrated exodus of the Israelite people from Egypt. Sampson, the strongest of the strong, is conceived by a barren woman made fruitful by an angelic oracle: and is consecrated to the Lord as a Nazirite, that is, dedicated to the Lord, before he is born. It would be too long to recount all the examples that could be adduced from sacred scriptures and very many gentile histories: by which it would be proven that God's ministers anticipated many either before or at the very birth, or favored war, or other arduous matters, or dealt familiarly with humans in many ways: But let these few things be said, so that unbelievers, and those who only want to admit what they apprehend with their animal senses, may learn how angelic ministers are sent for our service: who not only persuade us to do things in an insensible way, but have shown themselves in many visible and sensible ways, leading people, even those not yet born or not yet adults, to various things: and warning by various portents of future destruction, or leading to strenuous work: Which we can still prove from sacred scriptures.

What the angelic ministers of God accomplish in this attraction is proven from sacred scripture. Chapter VII.

**M**inisters of the most resounding tribunal, and of the supreme Arch-Muse, in order to be faithful, strive with all their might to bring everything into harmony with the Prince, as Dionysius very often repeats in his work on the angelic hierarchy: [Marginal note: Dionysius] For these (says the prophet) [Marginal note: David] come before, joined with those who sing psalms, and harmonizing themselves, like skilled choristers adapting all strings and voices in God's supreme monochord, so that they may render it harmonious and most sweet. And if there are any useless strings, or measures, or those wishing to dissent, they cast them out, cut them off, and overwhelm them: lest in the mundane, and celestial, or human instrument, anything dissonant be found through their idleness. And to begin from higher places, to the leader of the Israelite people, lest he be found discordant or dissonant in so great a province, an angel was assigned by the supreme God with great solemnity, leading and guiding. "Behold, I (He says) send my angel, who shall go before you, and guard you in"
Y ij

--- Page 480 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...ways: and lead you into the place which I have prepared for you. Observe him, and hear his voice, for he will not abandon you when you have sinned, because he wishes to admit nothing discordant. And so that you may know that he performs all things by my command and power, I say that in him is my name, that is to say, the power of that name, in which all wonders are accomplished.

This angel therefore, now going before, now following, defended the camps, taught, guarded, led out of Egypt, and guided the leader and the people whither they were going. An angel also was a companion and guide to the father of the chosen family, Abraham, in Egypt, in Haran, and wherever he went. An angel saved Isaac from sacrifice, guarded him in the pilgrimage made in Gerar and in various places, and from the dispute had with Abimelech. An angel also led Jacob into Mesopotamia of Syria, enriched him, and protected him from the envious Laban, and from the persecution of his brother Esau who pursued him. But also what angels accomplish in us, he foresaw in dreams, not yet well initiated in this manner, so that the animal senses, enemies of angelic custom, which he had not yet fully mortified, might be lulled to sleep by slumber. Indeed, great is the mystery of the ladder, and of the angels ascending and descending: but let this suffice for the present, that from it we are taught that all are led by the ministry of angels to whatever degree of virtues, merits, and dignity, and the unworthy are cast down to the lowest degree of misery: according as their evil merits demand: For this signifies the ascent and descent of angels: And the ladder, distinguished by steps, reveals the order of the universe, and the degrees of all things. Nor is further faculty given for speaking in so great a mystery.

Nor was an angel wanting to Joseph, the son of this patriarch, while his brothers pursued him with much hatred even to his sale: For a man appeared to him in the field, who in Hebrew is called איש [ish], by which name in many places Gabriel is said to have been the constant companion and teacher of that Joseph, as the Hebrews assert.
[Marginal note: Hebrews.] Indeed, it would be long to adduce all things which are read to have been done by angels for men in the sacred writings: but let us conclude with that sentence of the Psalmist, sung for any righteous person (as Jerome rightly understands):
[Marginal note: David]
[Marginal note: Jerome.] God has given his angels charge over you, to keep you in all your ways: They shall bear you up in their hands, lest you ever strike your foot against a stone: You shall walk upon the asp and the basilisk, and you shall trample the lion and the dragon. I know not what clearer could be adduced concerning the protection, guardianship, and guidance of angels.

But lest those who are under the evangelical law, and the Gentiles, should seem to have been abandoned by angels, and that angels served only the circumcised, as the Hebrews falsely boast, let us see what is treated in the evangelical and apostolic scriptures. To Philip, who by the command of the Holy Spirit joined himself to the chariot of that eunuch of Queen Candace (as we said a little before), an angel had first spoken, commanding him to go there, teaching that they also have care for the Gentiles. And to Cornelius the Centurion, a Gentile, he showed himself visibly, commanding and Peter, not to despise the Gentiles and the uncircumcised, who seemed unclean. We also read that an angel was given as a visible guardian to Agnes and Cecilia, and through her intercession, to her husband Tiburtius and brother-in-law Valerian, after their bodily eyes were cleansed by baptism, he offered himself to be seen, and filled their nostrils with odor and fragrance—

--- Page 481 ---
TONUS OCTAVUS. 171
...to have filled. How familiarly he dealt with evangelical women, after Christ was raised, we are more fully taught in the Gospel. But he awakened Peter in prison, freed him, led him out, and drew him where the prince who had sent him had commanded. It would certainly be tedious to recount all those whom the angel of the Lord rescued and led forth: For this is their office, as the prophet says: "He sends forth," but better according to the letter, "he tarries," or "encamps," the angel of the Lord around those who fear him, to deliver them. [Marginal note: David] Nor are examples lacking of those whom this angel restrained or cast away as discordant fibers. Balaam had been hired to curse the Israelite army, but the angel of the Lord stood before him, and with drawn and bared sword, terrified the donkey, and the beast, that is, the animal man signified by those beasts, concerning whom in the psalm: [Marginal note: Psalm.] "You will save men and beasts, O Lord." For this donkey sometimes signifies our animal nature, sometimes the common people, as Origen thinks, [Marginal note: Origen.] which first carried the lawgiver: afterwards, with Zechariah's oracle preceding, it carries Christ, and the redeemer of the world: But this (donkey/people) is commanded to be unbound by the apostles together with the colt under the yoke, because in the Gospel the people were freed from the burdens of the old law: So that the new, and new synagogue, or collection of believers, might be denoted, the colt, and the son under the yoke, is added. This simple people adhering to God sees what the depraved and cursed prophet, and the ill-working teacher, cannot see, just as we read in many places in the Gospel, [Marginal note: Gospel.] that Jesus, the redeemer, was received by the crowd: but was scorned by the lawyers, and Pharisees, and chief priests, blinded in their malice. Therefore the angel protects the simple common people, and through them often wards off the cursed teacher, and him who attempts wicked deeds. In the camp of the Assyrians, demonstrating how detestable blasphemy is to God, he utterly destroyed and cast away eighty-five thousand from the blaspheming army. He consumed the Sodomites and Gomorrahites with fire. He overwhelmed the Egyptians with waters. He burned the Chaldeans with fire, preserving the boys in the furnace from the blaze. He killed seventy thousand of those numbered by David in Israel, extending his hand to destroy Jerusalem, unless the Lord, pitying him, had commanded the striking angel himself to hold back his hand. For this is the office of God's ministers, when the measure of wickedness is complete, not to permit discordant notes in God's most harmonious instrument, [Marginal note: David] as the divine Lyre-player sings: "The angel of the Lord constraining and pursuing them." But sometimes the Supreme Governor executes this through evil angels, as through ministers of justice, as the same prophet testifies elsewhere, saying: [Marginal note: The same] "And sendings through evil angels." Our heavenly John also mentions those to whom it was given to harm the earth, [Marginal note: John] and the sea, and other things. Up to this point, we have digressed to a few examples from many, to prove that leadership and attraction to good, and to punishment, according to merits and misdeeds, were given to angels: who are also appointed to arrange all things, as Origen explains at length in his book on Numbers, saying: [Marginal note: Origen.] "The world itself needs angels to preside over earthly armies, kingdoms, provinces, heavens, men, beasts, the birth and growth of animals, shrubs, plants, stones, and other things, bestowing upon them that power which they say is inherent in things from..."
Y iij

--- Page 482 ---
CANTICLE ONE

...by a hidden property. Much more is there need for angels, who preside over holy works, virtues, and men, so that they themselves, who always see the face of the Most High Father, may, by right guidance, be able to lead men, the heavens, and every even the smallest thing to its proper place, as harmonious members of this world, in which God, as the chief high priest, most sweetly arranging all things, dwells, not contained or circumscribed, but containing all things.

How all things proceed from God through the number six. Chapter VIII.

[Large decorative initial P]
[Marginal note: August.]
After we have discussed a little concerning those things attracting us to God, the numbers, through which we came forth and again return to God (as I agree with Augustine), are also not to be despised: since in many places of the sacred scriptures their significance seems to be magnified, and deservedly so: since God made all things in number, weight, and measure. We read therefore, not without mystery, that the supreme Creator, having proceeded to produce creatures, did so through the number six, which is indeed primarily perfect, and gives a triangle by a great sacrament, as we explained above: Which perfection it has from itself, not however because God created the world in it, as the same Augustine affirms elsewhere. Here therefore, the most perfect artisan first chose the perfect number for the perfect fabric of the world: And so that it might be harmonious, he chose that number which corresponds to the middle diapasonic intervals of perfect consonance: For there are six with seven intervals, after which one arrives at the eighth, which itself completes the octave: By which same order proceeds the weekly revolution, returning to the same eighth, from which it began: so that Sabbath returns to Sabbath, Sunday to Sunday, and the intermediate days are always six: Which six, if it is squared to 36, and simultaneously, with the denary number, is brought to a cubic form, they complete all degrees of the Zodiac, 360. It would also complete the days of the year, unless the sun sparingly passed one degree each day: For it extends its course up to 365 days, as many as there are joints in the human body. If indeed the number six is combined, it yields the signs of the Zodiac itself, and the principal joints in our body, and brings about many other things mentioned above, where we treated of the number twelve. And moreover, the number six, designating twice three, a binary-ternary, by which the Creator proceeded to work: For first he perfected the structure, secondly its adornment: For in the first three days he created all elementary things, and the foundations of this worldly fabric, and distinguished them: First the super-celestial from the terrestrial through the globe and mass of the heavens, afterwards the waters from the earth, bestowing upon the latter its fecundity: But in the remaining three days he adorned the fabric with its inhabitants, placing in the heaven two luminaries and stars: On earth, four-footed animals: In the waters, fish and their creeping things: In the air, birds and winged creatures. And thus the triune God, acting with material things, of which the binary, or duality, is from matter, communicated himself in a twofold manner: The Spirit in fire, light, and heat, vivifying all things: The Son in waters, and generation proceeding from them: But the Father existing as the principle and origin of all things, in the primordial foundation and in the base, upon which all things are established. But on the sixth day he produced man, the high priest of the whole world, all those things

--- Page 483 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 171**

embracing: Who also, growing through six ages, would progress, so that in the seventh and in the true Sabbath he might rest.
      How through the number six they return to the same, and especially into Christ, who is true rest and the true Sabbath. Chapter IX.
[Large initial S] Just as through the number six all things came forth from God, so through the same number, and in the same order, they return into Him, resting and blessed in the true Sabbath: Which Augustine touches upon somewhat in his *On Genesis against the Manichaeans*. [Marginal note: Augusti.] But we shall proceed further, as far as the spirit suggests. On the first day light was made, and for us returning to God it is necessary that that light appear, which illuminates every man coming into this world: and that light of faith, which is the beginning of progressing into God. On the second day the sphere of the heavens was placed, dividing between the waters above the heavens and the lower waters, signifying that discretion and spiritual prudence by which we may know to reject evil and choose good: and to separate spiritual and higher love from carnal and lower love: For those loves meet, and by a certain symbol an easy passage is given from the spiritual to the carnal, unless a curtain and a firmament of prudence, supported by divine grace, be interposed, which may divide between them. But the waters, which are gathered into one place on the third day, denote natural and voluptuous passions: which together ought to be gathered under the dominion of reason, so that our mind may appear dry, naked, and stripped of all earthly affections: Which so much pleases in the eyes of the Lord, that looking upon it, He delights in it, because it is good: And then He commands the earth of our mind, that it may sprout and produce green grass, and wood, or a fruit-bearing tree, according to its kind, that is, multifaceted virtue. But because light placed on a mountain cannot be hidden, nor should a lit lamp be hidden under a bushel, but placed on a lampstand, so that it may shine for all, namely, light and an example of good works: Therefore on the following day, which is the fourth, two great luminaries are commanded to be made in every well-doer: The greater luminary is a meritorious work done in grace, shining before God and His angels. The lesser luminary is prudence and wisdom in arranging lower things: which are a kind of night with respect to supercelestial things, to which, being free, it shines like the sun. But in arranging these lower things, since the examples of doctrine and the favors of saints and angels, who are like stars in the firmament of the heavens, are very helpful, therefore stars are added, placed there in favor of the Moon. But on the fifth day, to those progressing from virtue to virtue, it is said: "Let the waters bring forth swarms of living creatures, and flying fowl flying over the earth, and over the face of the firmament of the heavens," and not "under the firmament," as our translation has it. It follows, that God created התנינים הגדולים hataninim hagadolim, which we have translated as "great whales." It follows: "And every living soul, which the waters had brought forth according to their kind." Great are the mysteries concerning these whales, or *hataninim hagadolim*: For it does not appear why whales should have been expressed more than other fish, who are perhaps larger than them. Others, however—
                                                                                                            Y iij

--- Page 484 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...they interpreted that word *hataninim* as dragons, as in the last psalm:
[Marginal note: Psalm.] Dragons and all abysses. For they wish that word *hataninim* to signify both, sea monsters and dragons. But it does not even seem why dragons should have been expressed more than lions, kings of wild animals; or oxen, leaders of herds, unless we wish to understand that dragon, of which it is said in the psalm:
[Marginal note: David] "That dragon, which you formed to make sport of him": Who opposes all, especially those progressing in the way of God, and prepares a fiercer battle with his reptiles, who follow him without number, the more rightly and vigorously one proceeds. Against these, therefore, it is necessary that we take wings like doves, and birds, which fly not under the firmament, but over the face of the heavens through contemplation and elevation of the mind to God, saying with the prophet:
[Marginal note: The same] "Who will give me wings like a dove, and I will fly, so that I may flee from these snares?" And again: "Our soul is snatched like a sparrow from the snare of the fowlers, the snare is broken, and we are freed." If, however, we wish to interpret *hataninim* according to the etymology of the word, it signifies "donated" or "given": through which gifts of the Holy Spirit (as Origen thinks) we can understand: By these we may be able to prevail against all reptiles and snares prepared by adversaries in this worldly sea, and by them live a true life, which is hinted at in what follows: "And every living soul."
[Marginal note: Origen.] And because these gifts, which the Spirit bestows upon us, are first prepared by the Son of God, who is the true super-mundane water, as we said above, therefore it follows: "Which the waters had brought forth according to their kind." For thus it speaks of this spirit in the gospel: "He will suggest to you all things, whatsoever I shall say to you." And again: "He will receive of mine, and will announce it to you."
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] I pass over many things in silence, what mysteries we could deduce concerning these *hataninim*, flying creatures, and birds again produced, lest we digress further than this place requires. But when God had also been pleased with this, he looked with a happy eye, that it was good.

Finally, on the sixth day, he said: "Let the earth bring forth a living soul" (which we interpreted above as the mind), that is, better fruits of life: And this when we are somehow freed from this mortal body, living to God, conformed to him: In which God is so pleased that he not only praises and says that it is good, but cooperates with us, saying: "Let us make man in our image, with our likeness." For when man applies himself to God and virtue, he is transformed, and passes into his image in act, which he first had in potential: and is made male and female: Female indeed by receiving seed and conception from the true agent, according to that of Isaiah: "From your face, O Lord, we have conceived, and brought forth the spirit of salvation."
[Marginal note: Isaiah] But male is made, when he works according to the grace received. Therefore, when our intellect is coupled with divine light, the mind and man become complete, producing fruits, concerning which it follows: "Be fruitful, and multiply" producing much fruit, not content with little, "and fill the earth," that is, the earthly animal, with the outpouring of the higher man, or with charisms received from above: so that you may reduce that animal to the due servitude of the spirit: and then rule...

--- Page 485 ---
TOMVS OCTAVVS. 173

you shall have dominion over fish, birds, and beasts, that is, over all living virtues, whether they be watery, airy, or earthly: For fiery virtues, as heavenly and divine, ought to preside. And when man passes through these six steps, he will immediately reach the seventh, where he will obtain true rest: and Jesus, who by his own name is called YHV (יהו), in which are two letters of the great name of God, Y (י) and V (ו), with H (ה) interposed, which is the beginning of Sabbath (שבת), that is, true rest: so that we may understand Jesus to be not only the redeemer of men, but their true rest and refreshment, making us rest from our works and labors, and feeding us with himself, the living bread, who descended from heaven, and giving us to drink wine converted into that new wine, which is drunk in the kingdom of his Father. Moses kept silent about the eighth day, whose province it is to lead his Hebrews through the types of the law up to Christ, their rest, yielding to Him in the work to which He intended to lead us after that rest: For the shadowy law ought to lead us to the end of the shadow, and not carry us further, but that perfect executor and opener of the law (of whom Moses said, [Marginal note: Moses.] "Send, Lord, whom you will send") as the most perfect teacher instructs us to what works we ought to apply ourselves after rest, saying to the Apostles, that in the regeneration, which will be after the resurrection, they ought to sit judging the twelve tribes of Israel, exercising the office of God, having become his co-workers by his grace. And concerning all, he said that after the resurrection they will be like angels of God, who continually serve and minister to Him, executing what He commands: Which work differs greatly from the first, because that was with labor and anxiety, but this is without labor and with delight: That tends towards rest, but this seeks no rest, since it is itself to itself rest and the highest delight, which man can desire and have.

How the human race is led into God himself through the six ages. Chapter X.

**A**s the work of the world in six days, so also the course of the world itself, through six distinct times, as through six ages, comes to the sabbatical millennium described by John in the Apocalypse: For on the first day, [Marginal note: John.] the earth and heaven are said to have been made with a certain common light, and its division from darkness: and that the spirit of Elohim hovered over the waters. Thus man in the first age of the world is said to have been fashioned from soul and body, as from heaven and earth, with some light of natural law, and with divinity illuminating, especially while he was in a state of innocence: But light was divided from darkness, when man was expelled from that paradise of delight: and when the shining and divine Enoch was taken away from the dark multitude: And at the end of that age, it is said that the sons of Elohim approached the daughters of men, impregnating them. Indeed, there are here very great mysteries concerning the correspondence of the sons of Elohim impregnating the daughters of men, so that giants, or "the fallen ones" (as it is in the text), might generate men of renown and powerful from old with the spirit of Elohim: who, hovering over the face of the waters, made them fertile amidst the darkness that covered the face of the abyss. The second age began in Noah, who was as a certain middle and firmament, dividing in-

Y v.

--- Page 486 ---
OF THE FIRST CANTICLE

between that long-lived first age, and the second, in which the confusion of tongues occurred: denoted by the lower waters: And that medium was called heaven: because Noah was heavenly, dividing, and righteous in his generations, that is, to the extent that period of time permitted: For in that age the family of God was divided, in Shem and Japheth, from the family of the devil, in Ham with his descendants: For from him came Cush, that is, the Ethiopian; Mizraim, that is, the Egyptians; and Canaan, from whom the Canaanites, indeed inferior and reprobate generations, marked by the lower waters: and separated from those who were irrigated by the upper waters: And this divi-
[Marginal note: Jerome.] sion remains to this day, as Jerome wisely and well discusses in Genesis. Or the firmament, or globe of the heavens, distinguishing between waters and waters, was Saint Abraham, in whom, in that age, he was distinguished by a particular sign of the covenant with his family from the waters, that is, from earthly peoples and animals: For to him first was given a sensible and distinctive sign between family and family, and he was called the father of faith, that is, of the faithful: Yet it was not said on this day, or in this age, that it was good: because it was entirely subjected to troubles and calamities: For then the nations were scattered and divided on earth, and the confusion of tongues occurred, and the world was always in turmoil then, even in Abraham himself, the father of the chosen family: who suffered so many and such great things from the Chaldeans, that he was barely rescued from the fiery furnace: And from there he journeyed to Egypt, to Haran, and was greatly oppressed, until the familiar hospitality of angels comforted him: who also announced to the old man a son, and to his barren and aged wife a birth, namely Isaac, which means laughter, because in him the father rejoiced, and a happier age began. In this age, therefore, the waters began to gather, that is, the chosen people and the family of God, to one place, and to be separated from the Gentiles deprived of divine charisms, so that then the dry land might appear. Also in that age the Israelite nation was separated from the Egyptians: and like land moistened by the waters of law, doctrine, wisdom, and sacrifices, it was prepared, so that it might be said to it: 'Let the earth bring forth green herb, and fruit-bearing wood,' which before was empty and void without law and legal sacrifices: and this age proceeded up to David through fourteen generations, namely a double septenary. One was from Abraham to Amminadab, in which the people served, oppressed by burdens, crossed the sea, wandered through deserts, ascended mountains. In the other, from Amminadab under Salmon to David, it received the law, waged wars, and by military labor obtained the promised land to possess; moreover, it was adorned with kingdom and prophecy: And this third age was, as it were, double, consisting of two septenaries: of which one was dedicated to purification through servitude, the sea, the desert, and various oppressions: The other was ascribed to fruit and increase in the promised land and the obtained kingdom. And rightly both are done by the septenary, since purification, and remission, and good work are perfected by that very number (as we shall declare elsewhere, with God's favor): Which is hinted at in the mystical description of the fabric (of creation), when these two things are described as having been done on the same day. For first the waters were gathered, and

--- Page 487 ---
TOMUS OCTAVUS. 174

the dry land appeared, just as the waters were gathered during the people's passage through the dry land, and the dry land of the Red Sea: In these waters (says Paul) all were baptized, and initiated into [Marginal note: Paulus] the service of God: And they made various dwellings in the desert, which signify the progress of [Marginal note: Hieron.] penitents and those advancing in the way of God, as Jerome explained in a long treatise, which he named 'On the Forty-Two Dwellings,' in which the whole person is chastised by due penance. But in the other [septenary] (as we said), the sprout and fruitfulness of the land, now obtained in possession after the sea and desert had been traversed, is attributed. But when all these things had come to evening in the depraved Saul, and this day was closed, it is therefore necessary that another succeed. Therefore, in the fourth [age], the kingdom shines in David, Solomon, and the other kings: the priesthood gleams with the temple erected and sacred rites most famously instituted, like the Moon and the Sun: very many prophets flash like stars in the firmament. And this most splendid day, through a double septenary, succeeded, until evening came, and an unhappy night, with those depraved and worst kings, Manasseh, Amon, Jeconiah, and the others: so much so that they were led to a most miserable captivity in Babylon: From which it was necessary for another day to be renewed. Thus, the fifth age began under captivity, among a wandering and vagrant people, having no determined seat, like the birds of the heavens, which were produced on that day: But for comfort, they had heaven, which they could contemplate. Nor were there lacking great whales, namely great men like Jeremiah, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Zerubbabel, Ezra, Nehemiah, Haggai, Tobias, and similar ones: who excelled in captivity and amidst all the shaking waves: nor were they inclined to the worship of idols, nor to the rites of the gentiles, among whom they were wandering captives: To these adversities, as if properly cultivated with ploughshares, hoes, and rakes, it was said: 'Be fruitful, multiply, and fill the earth: and quickly dominate, to be freed from captivity:' For from them was produced that seed of salvation, Jesus the Son of God, the Blessed Virgin, and the apostles, and other apostolic and evangelical men generated from that stock. But when this age also began to draw to evening because of evil, avaricious, and hypocritical priests: and with princes given into the dominion of the Romans, the sixth age and day succeeded: This, therefore, was the most fortunate and auspicious [age], beginning under the Son of God and Redeemer of the world: and in whom, by God's grace, it will end with the most fortunate success, although it has suffered and still suffers various things: In this [age], man, produced from the earth, is led to the true image and likeness of God, so that he can even become a son of God himself, provided he believes in His name, not living according to flesh and blood, but if he is reborn of God in profession and deed. In this [age] also, serpents, reptiles, and all unclean things have been pacified and cleansed, as was shown to Peter, lodging with Simon the Tanner, in that vessel full of reptiles and unclean animals: To whom it was also said: 'Arise, and eat:' and to him resisting, it is said again: 'What God has cleansed, you must not call common and unclean:' For He has cleansed all things in His blood. In this [age] it is also said: 'Male and female He created them:' because the betrothal of the soul and the Church with Christ has been made by that sacrament, of which in—

--- Page 488 ---
CANTICLE THE FIRST

[Marginal note: Paul] Paul says: This is a great sacrament of Christ and the Church. In this, dominion is again given to man, and he is placed over cattle, serpents, and birds: because, having become a Son of God and co-heir with Christ, he rightly rules over all things, unless man willingly reduces himself to the servitude of sin, flesh, and the devil. Moreover, for food, all seed-bearing plants and fruit-bearing trees that have seed in themselves are prepared; but for all other living creatures, every green plant. Here, Augustine rightly doubts in his *On Genesis Against the Manichaeans* [Marginal note: August.] whether this literal meaning can be saved, since lions, tigers, elephants, bears, monkeys, and various other wild animals of this kind, living in deserted and sandy places, are not fed on herbs, but on flesh. Likewise, kites, eagles, hawks, and birds that live by prey. Hence, although in the book of *Retractations* he tries to save the literal meaning, nevertheless another sense must be sought, to which perhaps the words rather point. It must therefore be observed that when all animals have been brought into the service of man, then food is prepared for all, signifying that when passions have been subdued, and all things brought into the service of reason and Christ, then they have for food seed-bearing plants and fruit-bearing trees: because all works in the grace of the Messiah are meritorious and fruitful. But to those who live like beasts, only the green of wild grass is given, neither cultivated nor seed-bearing. For foods are indeed distinguished in the literal truth, although our translation states, "that they may be for food for you and for all living creatures of the earth," without declaring any distinction between the foods of humans and the foods of animals. A peculiar and hidden food is also given to those who live purely under the Messiah, concerning which [Marginal note: Apocalypse] in the Apocalypse it says: "To him who overcomes, I will give the hidden manna, which no one knows except he who receives it." This food is also given to him while still living in this world, together with that living bread which came down from heaven, until he reaches that eighth (day/state) itself, where in the Father's house we may eat and drink with the Son at His table that new kind of food. But if anyone becomes rebellious or unfaithful to Christ, the animal powers dissent from him; hence, not content with his food, they feed on the pure green of herbs along with the cattle. Behold how the human race, through the course of six ages, finally comes to Christ, as to the true Sabbath, and rest, and the seventh (day/state); through whom it returns to that eighth (day/state) from which it had departed.

How a particular man, living regularly, comes to Christ through the six ages signified by those six days. Chapter XI.

The entire course of how these six stages of human life correspond to the seventh seems difficult to investigate, unless that light illuminates it, which variously and appropriately illuminates every man through his ages with its rays. Therefore, imbued with that light, we shall endeavor to equate the stages of man with those six days. For an infant, emerging from the mother's womb, where it dwells in darkness, is said to come into the light, so that what is said, "Let there be light," or "Let light be," illuminating even itself, may most fittingly apply to it. This also must be observed, that that age itself passes in silence, celebrating no work

--- Page 489 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 175**

performing any notable work: indeed, if there is any, it is consumed by a flood of oblivion; because all those childish things are laid aside, and are forgotten, a small family saved; because few things remain in adolescents from infancy, namely, the seminal power and developing virtue. This is indicated at the beginning of the seventh year by the change of teeth, which signify the strengths and virtues of man, as we have declared elsewhere in a lengthy discourse. The second age follows after the course of seven years, in which always (as Chalcidius and Macrobius extensively relate) [Marginal note: Chalci. Macro.] some change occurs in man. In this age, therefore, the boy, freed from childish bonds, begins to be taught various doctrines and divine worship, just as the world was then taught by Noah. And the boy receives the dividing firmament, that is, discretion, which separates between waters and waters, namely, rational operations from animal ones. And because the age is completed, and no work is completed, but only begun, therefore it most aptly corresponds with that day, which the wise describer Moses, asserting it to be completed, thus says: "And there was evening, and there was morning, the second day." But in it, no work is indicated as perfected, since it is silent about what it says of other days: "And God saw that it was good." Hence, the boy is neither rewarded nor punished for work performed in this age, since it is not considered legitimate by any law, nor is it seen by God to be counted among other works. Nor should it be insisted that on the first day it was said, "And God saw the light, that it was good": because light is not our work, but produced by God for our benefit and aid. And although it is also said that on the second day the firmament, or the globe of the heavens, was made, the work was not yet perfect: because it was not yet adorned with the sun, moon, and its stars. The third age follows, in which man grows up, suited for both kinds of offspring, bodily and spiritual. For he becomes more apt for generation according to the flesh, and also according to the spirit: because then he begins to be watered by doctrine, law, and spirit, so much so that he is then judged by the wise to be fit for religion and spiritual burden. Whence it can deservedly be said to him: "Let the earth bring forth," namely, the earth of your mind, "green herb, and fruit-bearing tree." And this happens first by gathering the waters of his powers to their proper place, which at first were mixed, so that animal virtues were not distinguished from rational ones. For then a better separation of powers occurs, and it becomes clear to him how dry natural virtue is when left to itself. And here God sees in two ways that it is good: first, because the waters of powers are gathered together; afterwards, because the earth, moistened by supercelestial rains, produces fruit, so that he can say with the prophet: "For the Lord will give goodness, and our earth [Marginal note: David] will yield its fruit." The fourth age succeeds, which is called the most flourishing youth: where one who walks rightly is perfectly illuminated in mind, like the sun; and in the lower intellect, like the moon. For thus Plato teaches in the Symposium, that our intellect, united with divine light [Marginal note: Plato.] and made mind, is called the sun; but left to itself, it is the moon; and mixed with animal passions, it is the earth producing lower fruits. After youth, in the fifth place, follows virility, by which man ought to be a perfect man, adorned with perfect virtue and wisdom, which is called "salutary water" in Ecclesiasticus: [Marginal note: Ecclesiasticus] And because in wisdom it produces better sprouts, therefore it is said, pro-

--- Page 490 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...And because in wisdom it produces better sprouts, therefore it is said, let the waters bring forth living soul. Also great whales are brought forth, that is, robust and strenuous works, and most solid counsels: which fear no assaults of the sea. Therefore they grow in strength, virtues, works, name, and fame: therefore it is said to those existing in this age: "Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters of the sea," that is, you should possess complete water-wisdom, by which it may be permitted to you to traverse all the gulfs of the sea. But unless man directs all these things towards God, he still lives somewhat as a beast, just as it happened to Solomon (although he was most wise): therefore it is said, that beasts and cattle were made, each according to its kind: But if [Psalm.] he lives for God, the sixth age immediately succeeds him with that old age, about which it is said in the psalm: "My horn shall be exalted like that of a unicorn, and my old age in the mercy of udders." In a wonderful way, when he was believed to fail in old age, he rejoices that he has received the strength of a rhinoceros: And when she was thought to be barren, he rejoices that she was most fruitful: Which we read has happened to few, that they became stronger in old age. There are, however, those who do not fail in old age from the strength of spiritual powers, as it is written concerning Moses, of advanced and mature age, at the end of the law, not without mystery, that when he was one hundred and twenty years old, his teeth were not diminished, nor did his eye grow dim: because he failed neither in speculative nor in operative [CHRIST.] virtue until the very end. And in this way, the sixth age and old age are most blessed: to whom our rest says: "I am with you until the consummation of the worldly age, and of yours." And just as the world in its last age was endowed with more perfect charisms, so also the human world (is endowed) with the grace of healings, virtues, miracles, and all kinds of perfection: which is given more at the end of life than at the beginning and in the middle. And these acquire a mind: which, as in most cases, arrives late: Having acquired this mind, they are also adorned with the perfect image and likeness of God: Whence it remains for them, that having completed the race, they receive the crown of righteousness [Paul] with Paul, who says: "Not only for me, but also for those who love his appearing." And they receive this in that seventh (age), and in perfect rest in Christ: through whom they may finally come to the eighth, from whence they proceeded, with the race completed, and perfect harmony, and a well-conducted, most sweet diapason. Nor is it without mystery that this seventh day, in which all things ought to rest perfectly, is placed without a succeeding evening: because then there will be no more night, nor sorrow, nor defect: but we shall rest in perfect and perpetual light, as our very rest [CHRIST.] prayed for us, saying: "Father, those whom you have given me, I wish that where I am, they also may be with me: and that they may see the glory which you have given me before the foundation of the world:" and it will always endure without any admixture of darkness: And He blessed this seventh age, for rest, according to what He promised He would say in the seventh age of the world: "Come, blessed [The Same] of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world."

--- Page 491 ---
TONE EIGHT. 176
Christ is true rest, and true sabbath. Chapter XII.

[Decorated initial V] Let us begin from the interpretation of the word: sabbath comes from שבת (Shabbat), which signifies rest: Since this cannot be had in the continuous movement and pilgrimage of this life, therefore Paul says: [Marginal note: Paul] Let us hasten to enter into that rest, which is the heavenly homeland, and eternal life, and who will give it, let us hear our Christ: I (he says) came, that they might have life, and have it more abundantly: And again: My sheep hear my voice, [Marginal note: CHRIST] and I give them eternal life, and they will not perish forever, nor will anyone snatch them from my hand: because that rest will be eternal, from which no one will be snatched, no one will be drawn out. And they will be (says Isaiah) in abundant rest, in tents of security: [Marginal note: Isaiah] By which words both abundance and security are denoted: And our Jesus, the true rest of all, will give both from that infinite shared essence. Hence after he promised life and happiness, and added this eternal [life/happiness]: My Father, [Marginal note: CHRIST] who is greater than all, gave it to me, namely the essence, as all interpret, and the object, in which all ought to be blessed: Which can be understood in the very mystery of the letters, if one has tasted the mysteries of the sacred letters: For in this word שבת (Shabbat) is the letter ש (Shin), which is the seal of supreme wisdom, who is God the Son: And ת (Tav) is the last letter designating the final reason, ש (Shin) however [designates] the beginning. שבת (Shabbat) is taken for the whole word, just as it is a common way of understanding among the Hebrews that sabbath signifies rest. If therefore the whole is woven together, this implies: wisdom, or God the Son, is the end, and the rest: How much these things agree with Christ, Paul, discussing with the Hebrews skilled in these mysteries, states: Let us enter (he says) into rest, [Marginal note: Paul] we who have believed: as he said: To whom I swore in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest. It remains therefore for some to enter into it: but those, to whom it was announced earlier, did not enter because of unbelief. And since, with the works completed from the foundation of the world, it was said: And God rested on the seventh day from all his works: And here again, if they shall enter into my rest, and he determines a certain day by saying 'today', namely in David after so much time: For he says, Today if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts: For if Jesus had given them rest, he would never speak of another [day/rest]: Therefore on this day, Jesus remains the most sabbath-like for the people of God, who have entered, or will enter, into his rest: in which he himself rests, just as God [rested] from his works: Let us therefore hasten to enter into that rest. Behold how clearly, how lucidly the Apostle testifies and proves that Christ is our rest: Whom Augustine [Marginal note: Augustine] follows in a long discourse against the Manichaeans: For in Christ rests such a fullness of divinity, that all things which seemed divided by most diverse reasons in the old law—by many kinds of sacrifices, very many precepts, inexplicable ceremonies—are absolved by this one unique end, Christ Jesus: who (as the same Apostle teaches) [Marginal note: Paul] is the author and perfecter of faith: and in whom all things ought to be completed and rest: In him ages and times are fulfilled and closed: In him all who labor...

--- Page 492 ---
...all who labor, how much more all things together, and the universe itself,
which is completed by these individual things collected into one? For all beauty is much more praiseworthy
in the whole than in a part: For there is greater beauty of the whole body
than of the nose, or of the mouth, or of the cheeks: And more beautiful is a speech composed of words...

--- Page 493 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 177

...and its clauses, than the words themselves, or particular sentences: And a song from all voices, and the harmony of many, is more pleasant than that of only one voice, however sonorous. Thus the universe of the world is more beautiful and better than its parts and members: therefore, of the completed fabric, it was said that all things were very good, that is, perfect in their totality. This sense is indeed beautiful, but a more beautiful interpretation (if I am not mistaken) is found in the most beautiful Jesus: if the wise teach truly that things are good and finally beautiful only insofar as they participate in the highest being, the highest good, and the highest beauty (as the Acade [Marginal note: Academi.] mics add), how much more so is the highest being, the highest good, and the highest beauty itself, from which all beautiful things participate. Hence our Theolo [Marginal note: Theolo.] gians said that human nature is more perfect after the fall than before: because, united to Christ God, it has been adorned as with a royal necklace: and made beautiful by a divine lineage and ancestry through its regeneration in Christ himself, and by a greater communion with God. Since, therefore, each thing is more beautiful and better the more it participates in the highest beauty and the highest good, God, those things which come together in Christ, the most beautiful and best of all created things, are more beautiful and better: Therefore, to Christ, who, according to the Apostle, was predestined to be the Son of God, brought forth in power on the sixth day as the first of all [Marginal note: Paulus] creatures, and placed at the head of the eternal volume (as some wise men teach), and with all things brought back under his dominion, and all things renewed in him, in whom it pleased the supreme Father to make all fullness dwell, then all things were made more beautiful and better, and fruitful in him, to whom the Father gave all things: and in whom if anyone does not remain, he will be cast out like a branch, and will wither: and he will be cast into the fire, and burn. Thus also sacrifice, and priesthood, and all things pertaining to sacred rites, received increments of their goodness in him, as Paul says, "Christ, having come as a high priest of the good things to come, through a more ample [Marginal note: Idem] and more perfect [way]," And he proceeds with a long discussion with the Hebrews and Romans, demonstrating that the law, priesthood, and sacrifices were made more perfect in Christ, receiving better increments: For in him all things are perfected, magnified, and exalted, so that he did not speak without mystery when he said: "When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all things [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] to myself," and by exalting them also. Therefore, whoever wishes to be perfected and exalted, let him adhere to him and serve him: who says: "If anyone serves me, my Father who is in heaven will honor him: for where I am, there also my minister will be." [Marginal note: Idem] The perfect diapason is completed in the octonary. Chapter XIV.

[Large decorative initial S] IF we wish to reach the eighth and true diapason, it is indeed necessary that we enter into the innermost sanctuaries: For then we reach the eighth, when we return to God himself, from whom we proceeded: so that we may say with Christ: "I came forth from the Father and have come into the [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] world: again I leave the world and go to the Father." For we too came forth from the same parent, having entered into this world, so that we might return to him through six days, or through six ages, or progressions: after which rest will be given, according to that passage of the Apo [Marginal note: Apocal.] calypse: "Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord," that is, by the death of the righteous, from now on.

Z

--- Page 494 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Now the spirit says that they may rest from their labors, namely in Christ, to whom those dead to the world live. After which rest (a wonderful thing indeed) follows an operation happier than the rest itself, yet very different from the primal operation, indeed, almost opposed to it: For the former concerns an exit from God into Christ, in whom we are perfected and rest; but this latter (concerns) a return with Christ into God, and union through Him with the Father. Appropriately indeed, between these two opposite movements, in the way we have said, a middle rest is given, which natural philosophers teach is found between any two contrary movements: For there are contrary movements of exit and return; and there are also contrary operations of those: because one is laborious, expecting rest, the other desires no rest, nor does it reach an end; since that operation, and continuous entry into God, is rest itself, and supreme pleasure, beyond which no other is given: And this second kind of operation makes not that material, inauspicious binary, but the most holy and true diapason, consisting in a double proportion, yet with seven intervals and eight limits. And when through the rest had in Christ, and through Christ we have arrived at this supreme operation, there is no longer for us a seventh day of rest, and a Sabbath to be celebrated: but that day, in which a better operation succeeds than the first, which was effected from the beginning on the same day. For the exit of all creatures from God, and the operation of God Himself in unfolding them into creatures, began on the first day; and the return into the same God through resurrection and stable union took its beginning on the same day, which is therefore called the Lord's Day, or Sunday: therefore the Sabbath itself, and the seventh, and the day of rest, has been changed into this eighth, and Lord's Day, a more celebrated festival indeed by mystery, and by a most profound secret. Therefore, rightly cease in us, for whom, through the true rest, Christ, a return to God is given, all sabbatical festivities celebrated by the ancients: who were expecting to come into the Sabbath, through which alone [CHRI STVS.] a return to the eighth is given, as He Himself says: "Without me you can do nothing." And again: "No one enters except through me." And because the Hebrews are unwilling to receive this Sabbath, which has already come, nor do they care to enter through it, therefore they cannot arrive at the [Idem] eighth, to which we arrive only through the Sabbath, Christ, who again says: "If anyone does not enter through me, he is a thief and a robber." But if anyone enters through me, namely to the eighth, he will enter into the divine inner chambers, and will go out to the vestibules of created things, not serving them, but through them praising the Creator; and everywhere he will find pastures. In which most sweet symposium he will perceive that harmony of glory, by which the Seraphim (as Isaiah saw) sang together that heaven and earth are full, the creator and the creature, the maker and the work, from love and mutual correspondence to each other.

That the heavens in their revolution perfectly lead to the diapason. Chapter 15.

[Decorative initial 'D']
Two things are to be considered in the diapason: One, that it always returns to the same tone from which it departs; the other, that that tone is not of the same key and nature. For it occurs from G to G, or from D to D, as musicians (know).

--- Page 495 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 178

let us use terms, and of this kind, as is clear: but one is of low natural, the other of
high natural, as newer musicians have in use: Or (if we follow the Greeks) one [Marginal note: Greek Musicians.]
is from proslambanomenos, which is called added because it was found after all others: the other is
in mese, which we call the middle: And from this up to nete hyperboleon, that
is, the ultimate excellence, is another diapason: And in the same order it is found in other terms:
in which there is some identity, or agreement, yet with a difference:
because there are different keys, and one tone is higher than another, but in nature
they correspond very greatly: Thus also the heavens in their daily circuit always all
return to the same place from which they had departed by a point of the circuit: yet it is not
the same revolution, nor of that day, degree, or minute: because every heaven
or planet changes its degree on any given day, or at least a minute, like Mars, Jupiter,
and Saturn: which do not exceed a degree on any given day, but some
minutes: But the starry heaven, even if (as many believe) it moves by some space
from its place, also completes its revolution every day, returning
to the same place by a point from which it had departed: All these heavens, by these their
revolutions, not only signify, but also favor, that all things into which they flow
follow this circular motion, and return to that from which they proceeded: Some
indeed by corruption to the earth, or the matter from which they are composed: others,
however, incorruptible, by separation from this gross matter, return
to that principle from which they emanated, yet under a different reason: For they
proceeded from Him, inasmuch as He is the beginning, and they tend towards Him, inasmuch as He
is the end: Yet the same God is the beginning and the end. They all also make
their diurnal revolution in 24 hours: which yield three octaves, or octonaries:
which, compared to each other, give a triple proportion: For 24 contains three eights:
And this proportion constitutes a diapason and a diapente: so that the circuit
of the heavens may also be harmonious, just like their distance, and the correspondence of their
motions to each other.

About the harmony of the heavens, both from distance and from the consonance
of motions. Chapter XVI.

The heavens are most consonant not only from motion, but also from distance
and mutual agreement, almost all antiquity attests.
Censorinus, Pliny, and Eratosthenes, assigning the distances of the heavens from the [Marginal note: Censorinus, Pliny, Eratosthenes.]
Pythagorean workshop, gather that the circumference of the earth is
two hundred and fifty-two thousand stadia: And they judged that as many stadia as there are on earth, so many
are there in each of the stars, although they are said to be of diverse magnitudes: But leaving aside this
controversy as less opportune, we say that these stadia are Italian, of one
hundred and twenty-five feet, not Olympic, which are of six hundred feet: nor Pythian,
which are of one thousand feet. Therefore, from the earth to the Moon are one
hundred and twenty-six thousand stadia, and they make an interval of a tone: But from the Moon to the star of Mercury -
                                                                                                                                Z ij

--- Page 496 ---
**FIRST CANTICLE**

Now, to the one which is called Stilbon [Mercury], half of that, as it were a semitone: From here to Phosphorus,
which is the star of Venus, almost the same amount, that is another semitone: Then further to
the Sun, triple, as it were a tone and a half, which is called a diapente: From the Moon, however,
double with a half, which is a diatessaron: From the Sun, however, to the star of Mars, to which
the name Pyrois belongs, there is the same interval as from the Earth to the Moon, and that makes a tone:
From here to the star of Jupiter, which is called Phaethon, half of that, which makes
a hemitone: The same amount from Jupiter to Saturn, whose name is Phanun, then a-
nother semitone: From here, however, to the highest heaven, where the signs are, likewise a semitone:
And so, from the heaven itself to the Sun, the interval is a diatessaron of two and a half tones:
To the summit of the Earth, however, from the same heaven, there are six tones, in which a diapason sym-
phony is formed, so that the entire machinery of the heavens is a kind of enharmonic system, distinguished by the most consonant distances,
and bound together by harmonious numbers. Therefore, the sweetest harmony of the heavens,
[Marginal note: Pythag. Plato] and the authors we have cited, and all Pythagoreans affirm to be most consonant not only
in their distance, but also in their motion. Plato, however, to produce this
melody, said that individual sirens sit on individual spheres, signifying (as
someone from his school declares) that the motions of the spheres present songs to the deities.
[Marginal note: Procul. Calcid. Ptolem.] This same harmony is asserted by all who profess his doctrine, especially Proclus
in Cratylus and in the Republic, and simultaneously with Chalcidius in Timaeus. Ptolemy, the
foremost balancer of celestial things, says in his *On Harmony*: "The Sun and Moon, the pri-
mary moderators of our genesis and life, agree with others in certain sonorous numbers not
only in motion, but also in effect: And because Jupiter is associated with the Sun in all
auspicious numbers, but with the Moon in more, while Venus is joined with the Moon in all,
but with the Sun in more, therefore he decrees Jupiter to be the primary giver of good things, then Venus,
[Marginal note: Cicero] for the soul and body. To this Cicero assents in his *On the Nature of the Gods*, saying:
"So great is the harmony of the heavens from dissimilar motions, that while highest Saturn
cools, the star of Jupiter, placed between them, illuminates and tempers them." And he further discusses many things
about the agreement not only of their qualitative virtue but also of their consonant operations
for the safety of the world, and for the increase or stability of things, at least through succession.
[Marginal note: Boëtius. Macro. Stoici Albertus. Isahac] I also omit what Boethius in the proem of *Arithmetic*, Macrobius in the first book of *On the Dream
of Scipio*, Albertus in *Six Principles of Porphyry*, and the Stoics (as Isaac testifies in his book
*On Definitions*) transmit. But most especially I keep silent about how great a mystery in the sacred
Hebrew scripture, written in its own language, the accents over individual syllables
reveal the motion and harmony of the heavens, which, the deeper the sacraments,
the more they are hidden from the common people. I also pass over those things which more recent authors
have extensively discussed here, distinguishing songs into three kinds: sensual, intellectual,
and divine: To the middle of these belongs the celestial harmony, which is perceived not by sense,
but by intellect and reason. Nor will I offend more serious men if I adduce
those things which our contemporaries have perceived and approved, and have attested concerning the
modulations of the planets and heavens arising from their great motions and from epicycles,
so much so that every harmony practiced here is crude...

--- Page 497 ---
**TONE EIGHT. 179**

some noise ought to be judged in comparison to that, if a comparison can be made between those things which are perceived by these coarser senses, and those which are perceived by better senses. And hence I gave credence with admiration, because those ignorant of mathematical things expounded so learnedly those things which they had foreseen by divine light, as not even the most skilled in those disciplines, no one doubts, would speak. Nor is it wonderful if most orderly minds, conforming to the Creator, see and contemplate those things which proceeded most orderly from the same [Creator]. Hence Paul, carried up to the third heaven, and to the lofty sources, which used to be hidden from the prophets, foreseeing with what order the supreme moderator of all things had fitted together all the members of his mundane instrument, said: "All things that are, are ordained by God," lest indeed things disordered and full of confusion should easily dissolve.
[Marginal note: Paulus]

**Concerning the consonant fecundity in the septenary number of the planets. Chapter XVII.**

Indeed it seems wonderful that the planets, through whom fecundity is supplied to all things, are distributed in the septenary number, which by experts in formal arithmetic, and especially by the Pythagoreans, is called an unfruitful number, because below ten it neither generates a number, nor is generated by any number; whence it is called sterile, and thence is considered unhappy and inauspicious.
[Marginal note: Pythag.]
If anyone, however, weighs this number with a straight balance, he will find it fruitful and most auspicious. For it is generated from the first even quaternary (four), as if from a female, and from the first odd ternary (three), as if from a male; whence comes all fecundity, beyond which no other is given. Hence, after one arrives at the septenary, no further progress is made, but always some change for the better up to the due increase. Concerning these changes, which occur in man through every septenary, Chalcidius, Macrobius, Galen, and others write most extensively.
[Marginal note: Chalcid. Macro. Galen.]
Which is most thoroughly proven in the fabric of the world, in which, when the Creator arrived at the septenary, he rested, not progressing further, but leaving all things made to produce through their own septenary courses. Hence it was not necessary for it to be composed of aliquot parts, so that it might generate, because from the first masculine and feminine number it had drawn perfect fecundity. Nevertheless, it is called sterile by Mathematicians, because it does not generate a number within the limits of ten, nor is it generated by aliquot parts. But by more secret wise men it is considered most fruitful, since from the feminine and masculine power which it contains, it gives fecundity and fruits to things. Therefore, the planets and signs provide fecundity to inferior things from the duodenary (twelve) and septenary (seven) number, both of which are composed of the first even and first odd, as if from masculine and feminine, but in different ways, as we shall presently say. And hence every planet and every sign partakes of a masculine or feminine nature, but Mercury partakes of both. But with perfect fecundity in the septenary itself, perfect rest occurs. For this number contains the first perfect senary (six), in which all things were made, and the seventh day of rest, which agrees with both Saturns, namely the celestial and the supramundane; and from both comes a Sabbath not unfruitful, but the end of the preceding course.

Z iij

--- Page 498 ---
CANTICLE ONE

after which immediately another follows, in which operations are again performed. And Christ, containing this septenary most perfectly, our true Sabbath, introduces us (as we [Marginal note: John.] said) to the eighth. Hence, not without great mystery, John, subject to the Spirit, saw seven golden lampstands, namely seven planets, and all septenary power: and in the midst, one like the Son of Man clothed in a *podere*, that is, a long robe covering everything down to the ankles, signifying that He covered all our sins, shame, and nakedness: and completed the work, and finishes it to the very end: and, existing in the midst, gives birth and fruit to all, both in the first generation of things and in their regeneration. Hence, declaring that He had perfected it, having brought the work to its conclusion, He cried out: "It is finished." Therefore, the septenary is most fruitful in things, although in numbers themselves it may seem sterile and unfruitful.

On the harmonious agreement of the septenary of planets with the twelve signs. Chapter XVIII.

[Decorative initial E] ND although a great discrepancy may appear in the numbers of the planets and the signs, nevertheless, there is a very great agreement in the root of both, which is the quaternary and the ternary: Which, if joined, constitute the septenary. But if one is squared by the other, by saying, "Three times four," or "Four times three," they yield twelve. Moreover, the planets agree with the signs in qualitative and elemental virtues, and in better powers, whence each of the planets has its domicile in some sign: and in some, its exaltation, receiving some power and nourishment from each of them. Nor do the seven intelligences presiding over the planets have less agreement with those twelve minds: which [Marginal note: John.] preside over the twelve signs. Of each of these, John makes mention in the Apocalypse, at the beginning of which he says: "And from the seven spirits who are before the throne of God:" whom I found also to preside over the planets. But at the end of the volume, where he describes the structure of the heavenly city, he testifies that in its twelve gates there were twelve angels: And therefore we have touched upon the agreement of these angels, planets, and signs: so that it may be understood how great a consonance both the ministers and instruments of the Creator lead us into the same. But the signs themselves are made and called the gates of the heavenly city, perhaps those twelve about which John writes in the same place. How these signs are the gates of the heavenly city, Plato touches upon in some way, saying that Cancer is the gate through which the soul descends to the body: [Marginal note: Plato.] and Capricorn is the gate through which it again ascends to God: Hence they called the former the gate of men, [Marginal note: John.] and the latter the gate of gods. But if there are twelve gates (as John testifies) equated with the twelve signs, or signifying them, each of those signs will be called a gate, but how, we will briefly run through. For Aries is a gate, and Taurus, which are offered for sin, without the purification of which no one can enter there. Hence one comes to Gemini, the acts of charity, namely of God and neighbor: Which twofold charity is strengthened in the strongest arms of Cancer, which—

--- Page 499 ---
TOMVS OCTAVVS. 180

by which man embraces every lovable object: Afterwards, in a wonderful way, it becomes
very strong in Leo, the most powerful of animals: Having come to this, man weakens his
animal (nature), reducing it to servitude, and renders it sterile through Virgo: But in Libra he weighs
the strengths of both, and actions recognized daily, which are greater and stronger works,
either according to the spirit or according to the flesh. He comes afterwards to the fortunate
Scorpio, of which we spoke above: that it bites with its tail, that is, without all evil works,
just as we read it was mystically commanded to Moses: that he should seize the serpent and instigator of
evil works by the tail: And seeing how great the serpent's malice is, he takes up a bow
and arrow and strikes it through Sagittarius: And he will come to Ca-
pricorn, the dwelling of Saturn, dedicated to God through contemplation, mentally gazing at
the heaven figured by the skins of goats, from which the covering of the tabernacle was
commanded to be made: And from there he proceeds to those waters which are above the heavens, of which the gate
is the celestial Aquarius: For through the waters of almsgiving and mercy, which are
celestial works, one arrives at the waters of divine grace, piety, and wisdom: And
finally we will arrive at the fish, which are nourished in the same waters, denoted by
the fish which Christ ate, already changed into a better state through resurrection:
which, together with a calf and a bird (as is taught in the Theology of the Hebrews), are prepared [Marginal note: The. he.]
for a feast for the just. These few things have been touched upon from the many that we could
say about these gates of the supernal city, and those things that lead and attract us
into them: so that from these few things we may understand that all things lead us to God—angels,
heavens, planets, signs, and whatever is from above: but most especially the reason and condition
of man, in whom all the aforementioned are accumulated and concluded.

On the true harmony of the heavens, which some, not understanding, falsely
deny. Chapter XIX.

<span style="font-size: 3em; line-height: 0.5em; vertical-align: -0.2em;">S</span>There are men of very grave authority who consider the modulations of the celestial
spheres utterly ridiculous: because that sound is not heard, nor perceived by any
sense, in no way persuading themselves how from that triple most swift motion in thick air
or fire, the celestial chorus does not resound, or the harmony is not heard. Hence they, along with Pythagoras,
removed harmony from natural motion; and against all Pythagoreans and Academics,
from violent and diurnal motion, adhering in this to their Aristotle, the principal enemy of this harmony.
But lest there be disagreement and discord among the supreme observers of this most consonant universe,
we will easily make them agree by attending to that in which they differ. The Peripatetics deny [Marginal note: Peripate.]
a vocal sound perceptible by these sensible ears: we grant them this. The Academics [Marginal note: Acade. Pythag.]
and Pythagoreans pass from vocal number to natural or formal (number), and arrange
the measures and numbers of the universe in the innermost sense of reason: and leaving behind
vocal harmony, which tickles the ears with drum, lyre, organ, and human voices, they
assumed a better one, which is in the numbers by which the Creator arranged the universe.
Which Plotinus clearly expresses when he teaches us to return to God through music, saying: [Marginal note: Plotinus]
Z iij

--- Page 500 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

Wherefore, after such sensible sounds, numbers, and figures, it is necessary to lead him thus, so that he may separate the matter in which are sensible proportions and their comparisons; and that beauty, namely formal consonance, which is in these, may be brought back. Moreover, let him learn that those things by which, full of wonder, he is vehemently affected, are not that beauty itself towards which we strive: so that it is not [Marginal note: Augustine, the same] this, or that beauty, but beauty only. And what Plotinus says about beauty, Augustine likewise pursues concerning the good, while he says: Take away this good, take away that: and consider the good in itself, if you can, and that is the highest good, towards which we strive. And between the highest good, the highest beauty, and the highest harmony, and this sensible good, beauty, and harmony, is that celestial middle, which is not sensible and vocal, nor most simple and divine, but middle and rational. Therefore, this external and vocal harmony is like a statue, and a certain image of a better harmony perceptible by reason: which statuary symphony, if anyone leaves it in the outer courts and scorns to adore it, he will be cast into the furnace of purging fire: where, enlightened and inflamed, he will adapt his three powers to the assembly of all things; and at the same time, running through each creature, he will attempt, together with all harmonizing things, to reach the highest maker, whom, as the threefold author of all things, intellect, reason, and will shall bless: and sometimes a fourth will appear, that is, this animal of ours made like the rational being: because, transformed for the better, and itself as if rational, and a legitimate son, it bursts forth into the praises of the Father, inviting all created things to do likewise, just like those three boys, as we read in Da- [Marginal note: Daniel, David] niel: and before them David had done so, inviting the elements, plants, hail, snows, rains, fish, animals, stars, heavens, and waters beyond the mundane, into the praise of the maker. And so that they might express divine, mundane, and celestial canticles in an appropriate style, they themselves, and other prophets, brought forth their writings in diverse meters: [Marginal note: Jerome, Eusebius, Jerome] as Jerome, Eusebius, and other most skilled attest. Job (as it pleases the same Jerome) begins in prose, proceeds in dactylic and spondaic hexameter verses, and because of the idiom of the language, frequently admitting other feet not of the same number of syllables, but of the same time: And sometimes the rhythm itself, sweet and ringing, is carried in numbers of feet that are free, which metrists understand more than a simple reader. But others strive to prove, by certain rules of metrical art discovered in that idiom, that that entire progress of Job is in hexameter verses: [Marginal note: The same] it was recently shown to me in Rome. But the aforementioned Jerome calls David a Pindar, Alcaeus, Flaccus, and Siren: because proceeding in diverse meters, together with the lyre, he proclaims Christ, and with the ten-stringed psaltery he would rouse Him rising from the underworld. [Marginal note: Solomon] Solomon, beloved of the Lord, sings in a most beautiful poem in that little work the epithalamium of the holy nuptials of man with God, of Christ with the Church, of both testaments with each other, of scripture with mystical meaning, the consonance resulting from the harmony of both worlds with the archetype, which he deservedly names the Canticle of Canticles. But the harmony and union of the archetype with the small

--- Page 501 ---
TONE EIGHT. 181

world, celebrated in the womb of a woman, and sings the praises of the woman carrying him in a wonderful hymn. Jeremiah also recounts his lamentations in tragic verse: [Marginal note: Ierem.] And (as some assert) Isaiah also proceeds in a certain metrical order. [Marginal note: Isaias] But the entire scripture, whether in verse or in prose, with its accents (as we have said), reveals with great mystery the movement and harmony of the heavens. Therefore, imitating these divine prophets and writers of the sacred page, though at a great distance, the ancient theologians of the gentiles—Orpheus, Aglaophemus, Empedocles, Parmenides, Heraclitus, Lucretius, [Marginal note: Orph. Aglao. Emped. Parme. Heracle. Lucre.] and others—tried to express natural and divine harmonies in numerous poems, so that the style might also agree with the subject matter.

On the harmony of the heavens with the supernal minds. Chapter XX.

Beyond those things which have been said above concerning the agreement of the stars with the angels, I also deem it necessary to examine this: that the angels themselves are moved by the Father, who is the fount, and origin, and first mover of all. Hence Dionysius: [Marginal note: Diony.] "All rejoice when the Father moves." Therefore, those (angels), moved by God, move the orb; and these (angels) arrange our bodies and other lower things to that harmony which the first mover of all himself commands. So that therefore those motions and influences might be harmonious, He placed appropriate intelligences over each orb and over individual stars: those seven supreme ones over as many planets, as we have said, and twelve over the twelve signs, and over that entire orb and the planets, the Queen of the heavens, who is therefore said to be crowned with twelve stars for the number of the signs, and adorned with many sevens, and full of innumerable charisms, just as the star-bearing heaven is full of innumerable stars. And because she contains the power of all the heavens and of the angels presiding over them, she is therefore deservedly asserted to be exalted above all choirs of angels. But the Prime Mobile ought to be governed by the Prime Mover; and through it, the other orbs (are governed), to which, however, particular ministers have been appointed, through whom, and through celestial instruments, that supreme moderator arranges all lower and particular things, yet with this law: that the higher ministers, and those nearer to the supreme king, move with fewer motions, but those more distant move with more motions. And consequently, those are happier who adhere more to the supreme One, than these (who are more distant), as Aristotle, [Marginal note: Aristote. Albertus. Ptolema. Mesta. Acade. Diony.] Albertus, Ptolemy, Mestalac teach; but especially the Academics with our divine Dionysius. And although we lower beings are agitated by many motions, they nevertheless attain the same harmony, that of the first, unique, and uniform motion from the same unique mover. Hence, the Queen of the heavens herself adheres more to the first and unique (mover), agitated by fewer motions, yet collecting the power of all within herself, and diffusing that collected power first into the twelve Apostolic princes, and consequently, descending to particulars, into very many (individuals), just as that power of the star-bearing heaven is divided into the twelve signs, and consequently into innumerable stars; and just as the power of the soul, collected first in the brain, through the neck, a single channel, which in the mystical body of the Church bears the type of the Blessed Virgin (as Jerome teaches), [Marginal note: Hiero.] descends to the twelve... Z v.

--- Page 502 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

...us, the principal parts of the body, and thence to more, and more particular [parts].
No less is the same virtue found collected in Christ the head, and diffused into twelves, and afterwards into very many parts, John saying: "From his fullness we have all received," [Marginal note: John.] as in the following volume, God favoring, we shall more broadly relate. Therefore through Christ, as through a masculine power, but through her, as through a feminine (power), this outpouring occurs: Who in this mystical body are joined, just as head and neck, or as spouses into one flesh, so those two into one spirit, as concerning all betrothed, or adhering to God, the Apostle says: [Marginal note: Paul.] "He who adheres to God becomes one spirit with Him." We have touched upon these things brought forth above so that readers may learn with what great harmony from all things, however diverse, yet moved by one, we are led into the same one: For just as a particular human is one individual, and directed to a single end, although distinguished by various members and motions, so this unique structure, and the mundane body, by diverse, and accommod...

--- Page 503 ---
                                TONVS  OCTAVVS.                                182

with the supreme measures: so that from there a prudent and intelligent reader may perceive the congruence of all lower things with the highest: For infallible Truth testifies that there are very many mansions in the Father's house: but following the older Theologians, we will revere those ten, whence the denary number, beyond which no further is given.

The Moon therefore, inasmuch as it is the receptacle of all higher influences, corresponds to the last enumeration: or to the first in ascending: which is now called the land of the living, now the tabernacle, now the Moon, now the receptacle and bosom of all influences, now indeed the kingdom: concerning which it is sung in the psalm: "Thy kingdom is a kingdom of all ages." (David) And again: "His kingdom shall rule over all." In which mansion, He who is always everywhere, is called Adonai, or Melec, that is, Lord or King.

But in that the Moon itself is a particular planet, it has its power from the second enumeration, which is called Yesod, that is, foundation, and the living God, the life of the world, and the disposer of all things, just as the Moon is of lower bodies: And there God is called Shaddai, which we can interpret as omnipotent, or sufficient to satisfy all: concerning which we have in the psalm: "He who dwells in the help of the Most High, shall abide in the shadow of Shaddai:" (Psalm) where it is translated, "he shall dwell in the protection of the God of heaven:" Since that name seems to have been silent in a great mystery, therefore another name for that place must be assigned, which is called El Chai, which we have interpreted as the living God: since from there, or through it from a higher source, or from the supramundane sun, the life of all proceeds, just as through the moon the favor of life is poured forth from the sun.

Mercury corresponds to the particular second enumeration named Hod, which with us sounds like adornment, beauty, or renown: concerning which the prophet says: "Confession and beauty are in his sight," (The same) for which it would be better said: "Renown, or adornment, and beauty are in his sight:" And again: "Confession and magnificence are his work:" but as the truth of the letter has it: "Renown, or adornment, and beauty are his work:" And here the influencing God is called Adonai Tzevaot, that is, Lord of hosts: Which name is not of war, but of piety, and of harmony, and of sweetness: To which lower Mercury leads the lower, and to which higher Mercury leads the higher.

But Venus has its power from Netzach, which interpreted is called conquering, or victory, or perpetual: and this word is placed in the titles of most psalms: For love conquers all, and brings the work to completion, with all labor esteemed as little, and held for naught: There indeed the influencing God is called Elohim Tzevaot, that is, God of hosts: Which name is of God ordering, or fabricating, and avenging judgment through wars, or through other punishments. Nor should anyone wonder that Venus is placed in the virtue of war, because every unjust war proceeds from depraved Venus, that is, from excessive self-love, or inordinate love: So also every just war proceeds from right love, and good Venus: because one justly wages war out of zeal for God, or for relieving those unjustly oppressed, whom we love.

But the Sun, the heart of the heavens, corresponds with Tipheret, the heart of the archetype: Which beauty, or that beautiful thing, we interpret—

--- Page 504 ---
**OF THE FIRST CANTICLE**

[Marginal note: Psalm.] ...is interpreted. from whom all things are beautiful: concerning which in the psalm cited above: "Virtue and Tipheret," that is, beauty in His holiness, or sanctuary: which is in the midst of the entire Divine temple as the Holy of Holies: For which in our translation we have sanctity and magnificence in His sanctification: And just as this sensible sun makes all things shine and appear beautiful, so that divine [power] makes all things beautiful with that beauty which [Marginal note: Socrates] Socrates sought from Hippias: In which glory and most beautiful throne, God is said to reside, יהוה (YHWH) tetragrammaton, and four-lettered: which, since it is ineffable and inexpressible, just like His beauty and glory, when read, is expressed under the name Adonai: But since this name is found elsewhere, another particular [letter] is prefixed, which is ו (vau), which, translated into our language, sounds like vau, which is the letter of life and knowledge, that is, of life and knowledge, and most appropriately, since therein is the tree of life and knowledge of good and evil, which is Jesus the Messiah. Mars, from גבורה (gebura), which signifies strength, [Marginal note: Dauid] has its strength: concerning which the prophet in the one hundred and forty-fourth hymn cited above says: "They will declare Your power": where גבורתך (geburateca) is found: And what is especially exercised there is called דין (din), that is, hard and severe judgment: [Marginal note: Psalm.] concerning which also in the psalm: "From heaven You made judgment heard": where "the earth trembled and was still" is found: because it is to be feared: And from that [place], through Mars, come severe punishments, and slaughters, and warlike men. Hence also God, exercising [Marginal note: Exodus Ierem.] His power by punishing the wicked, is called a man of war, as in Exodus, And in Jeremiah it is found: "The Lord is with me as a mighty warrior," or "as a strong breaker," properly interpreting that כגבור עריץ (chegibur bariz): Performing which office God Himself is called אלהים (Elohim): And the angels serving there are called sons of Elohim. Jupiter, however, so called because he helps everyone, always beneficent, corresponds with that dwelling which is called חסד (chesed): which can be interpreted as mercy, piety, or clemency: By which the Most High God, beneficent to all, always tempers hard and harsh things, spreading His kindness in all things, according to [Marginal note: Psalm.] that of the psalm: "His mercy is over all His works": And there God operating is called אל (el), which we have interpreted as God: because He cherishes all things, and helps all with the utmost piety and clemency: which is proper to Him. But we find Saturn to receive whatever he has from בינה (bina), which sounds like intelligence: [Marginal note: Ecclesia] where the Holy Spirit is especially said to reside: concerning which in Ecclesiasticus: "And the spirit of understanding will fill him": Who also gave to prophets and and apostles the understanding of secret things: From which place the Hebrews received their Sabbath, and the seventh day dedicated to both Saturns, namely the celestial and the supermundane: And from there come remissions, and years of rest, and jubilees through the simple or squared septenary: All of which God operating is called יהוה, that is, the letter ה (He) with the ineffable and four-lettered name: concerning which the magnitude of the mystery forbids us to speak. The starry heaven is subject to חכמה (chocmah), which is that supreme wisdom which is the Son of God, full of ideas and forms of all things to be produced, and

--- Page 505 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 183**

of things to be produced, just as that heaven is full of stars, containing the power of all things within itself, as we said a little earlier. On which throne the Son, sitting at the right hand of the Father, is Himself called God YHWH, which is the very semaphoras, and the four-letter name together with Yod (י), the letter indeed signifying the simplest divinity itself. But the Primum Mobile corresponds to the First Mover and the source of all things: who, moving all things, draws all things to Himself, just as the center draws all lines of the circumference into itself: For it is the center and the circle and the sphere, embracing and filling all things, and drawing all lines into itself. I would not dare to ascribe this attraction to the Most High Father, unless His Son taught me, saying: "No one comes to me unless my Father [Marginal note: CHRIST] draws him." Since the Son has this attractive power from the Father, He therefore said: "When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all things to myself." In which supreme seat residing, the Most High Father is called אהיה אשר אהיה (Ehyeh Asher Ehyeh), which we have interpreted as, "I am who I am," but it would be better said, according to the sense of the letter, "I may be who I may be." Or according to another way, His name is only אהיה (Ehyeh), which sounds the simplest being of divinity, about which it is not permitted to speak. Hence by the learned He is called ראה לא עין (Ayin lo ro'eh), that is, "the eye does not see," because no one knows the Father except the Son, and him to whom the Son wills to reveal Him. Therefore I will only say this, that when He is named "He who is," or "I am who I am," the Father of lights is understood: from whom (as James [Marginal note: James] testifies) every good gift and every perfect gift emanates, yet flowing through diverse channels into all lower things, He provides that all things may cooperate with Him, so that all things conducive may be led into Him. Hence all prayers ought to be directed to Him, as He taught, who alone knew Him, saying: "When you pray, say: Our Father." And repeating often, He exhorted that we should ask from the [Marginal note: CHRIST,] Father, the giver of all good things: Who by His clemency may direct us to the same end, for which, and to the contemplation of which, we were instituted.

END OF THE FIRST CANTICLE.

--- Page 506 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

The second canticle, which IS CALLED NEW, IN WHICH WE WILL DEMONSTRATE THAT ALL THINGS IN CHRIST CORRESPOND WITH MULTIPLE HARMONY, with sweeter melodies than joints and members in a worldly or human body.

**PROEM.**

[Marginal note: David]
**S**INCE in many places, P.B., and often repeated, we see by the Royal prophet in his hymns that delightful (so to speak) refrain, "Sing to the Lord a new song," I was inquiring whether any new things have been made, to be sung with a new song: since we see no other heaven, or stars shining with new splendor: Nor other courses for the sun to traverse by day, and the moon by night: Nor the day to be distinguished by other hours, nor the summer season to advance with new increases, or to wane with recent decreases in wintry weather: Nor do we perceive any new living creatures, or any new kinds of things: And to conclude briefly with the Wise Man, nothing new under the sun: Nevertheless, by heavenly oracle we are taught that all things were made new in the time of the Redeemer: For He who sat on the throne said (says John in his most celebrated vision), [Marginal note: John] "Behold, I make all things new." [Marginal note: Paul] And Paul, in whose breast Christ himself resounds, speaking with the Corinthians, says: "The old things have passed away; behold, all things have become new." Hence he teaches us to praise God not only with a new song, but with new works and a new life, while he says: "Stripping off the old man with his deeds, put on the new: who is renewed in the knowledge of God according to the image of Him who created him." Which knowledge is given through the word and the light, which illuminates every man coming into this world: so that it may enlighten and polish the defiled image, and in a certain way render it new: so that just as all things were made through Him, so through the same all things might be renewed in man: as [Marginal note: The Same] the same Paul teaches us in Colossians, saying: "Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature, for in Him were created all things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers, all things were created through Him and in Him: And He is before all, and all things consist in Him:" And this much for the old; but concerning the new, he continues, saying: "And in Him it pleased [God] to make all fullness dwell, and through Him to reconcile, or to sum up (as the Greeks have it), or to renew all things, as is the truth of the matter, making peace and renewing through the blood of His cross, whether things on earth or things in heaven" with a sweeter sound and a more pleasant harmony than they had been in-

--- Page 507 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 184

instituted: Therefore (as the divine John testifies) when the saints beheld these things in full glory, [Marginal note: Ioan.]
they sang a new song: Which also the ministers of that Prince and Re-
deemer, recognizing His coming forth into this world from His mother's womb, sang with a clear
voice beyond the usual, saying: Glory to God in the highest, and on earth [Marginal note: Angeli]
peace to people of good will: to whom, namely, is given renewal and union with
God, to whom, the Most High, be glory, who at last, by renewing all things through His Son, brought back God's ultimate
work into Himself with a new harmony, and a new and wondrous conso-
nance: which neither musicians knew, nor Pindar or Homer sang in verse, nor [Marginal note: Pinda. Homer.]
Ligystus with his lyre, nor Orpheus with hymns, nor Apollo with his lyre or tortoise-shell [Marginal note: Ligiſtus]
sang: Nor did the intellects of philosophers or the wise of the world devise it: But this [Marginal note: Orphe. Philoſo.]
only He knew, who brought about this harmony, and His Spirit, of whom it is
said, 'He will suggest all things to you, and will teach you all things': Who not only teaches
externally, but transfers Himself into holy souls, and establishes them as friends and harmonizers of God,
and of His secrets. He therefore assisted the most holy prophets, so that they might sing this new song as a most
sweet prelude: And He, teaching and
exciting new harmonizers, and them singing the new song with a clearer voice,
would somehow render us instructed in the same, so that, taught by them, and
strengthened by the same Spirit, we might extend our hands to the melodies of that song,
and with the clearest voice proclaim to the ears of all that Jesus Christ, the Son of the Most
High God, conceived in a new way, and born in a new way, has raised up a new
body for the Church: To this new militia He delivered a new sign,
taught a new life, and new customs, and a new doctrine:
He prepared new food: He instituted new sacraments:
He established a new dominion, and a new principate,
and a new way of rewarding:
Finally, He provided a new passage to God,
renewing all things: so that for those
writing about Him, a new song
is to be sung by us, and this
in eight tones, in our
manner,
as if with a new diapason, we
shall complete it.

[Decorative printer's mark]

--- Page 508 ---
CANTICLE II
THE TONES OF THE SECOND CANTICLE.

[Decorative initial C]Hrist, and Messiah is God's wisdom, and the word containing all things by ideal reason, and existing as man embracing all lower things in act. Tone First.
Christ is the life, and sustenance of all, vivifying all things, and drawing all things to himself. Tone II.
Christ is the true priest, true bread, host, and sacrifice purifying all things, and pacifying all things. Tone III.
Christ is the highest truth, and light teaching all, and illuminating all things. Tone IIII.
Christ, made father of all through true regeneration, and head of the mystical body flows into all members. Tone V.
Christ is the end, and completion of all works, giving to all, that they may work. Tone VI.
Christ is King of kings, and supreme Emperor ruling all things, and moderating them. Tone VII.
Christ is mediator: through whom passage is given to all, that they may come to their end. Tone VIII.

HEADINGS OF THE FIRST TONE.

[Decorative initial M]Essiah's divinity is proven by reasons. Ch. First.
The same is corroborated by Prophecies. Ch. II.
How divinity, and the word are in him. Ch. III.
In the same word all things were contained. Ch. IIII.
Therein all things are in number, weight, and measure. Ch. V.
Exemplary cognitions in the mind of the supreme artisan are called ideas, and are. Ch. VI.
Who admitted these ideas. Ch. VII.
Who rejected them, and for what reasons. Ch. VIII.
They are errors, and not reasons, which seem to act against them. Ch. IX.
What we have from ideas. Ch. X.
That all harmony proceeds from the word. Ch. XI.
How these ideas are understood by us. Ch. XII.
The necessity of things, and all being depends on ideas. Ch. XIII.
Therein are also ideas of virtues, and rules, according to which we ought to live. Ch. XIIII.
There are reasons moderating honest, and base actions. Ch. XV.
Christ is true man full of divinity. Ch. XVI.
Just as Christ, in that He is God, contains all things by virtue, so in that He is man, He contains all the same things collected in the same most excellent note. Ch. XVII.

--- Page 509 ---
TONE ONE. 185

THE DIVINITY OF THE MESSIAH IS PROVEN BY
REASONS. Chapter One.

[Illuminated initial M] ESSIAH CHRIST, our Anointed One, was
and is God, we can prove not only by witnesses and oracles, but by the strongest
reasons: For we see the ready consensus of all,
and without disagreement, that blessed God,
existing of Himself, has all things from Himself, but nothing from another:
All other things, however, have their being and operation from Him:
therefore the great Theodorus said, with Proclus as witness: All things pray, except [Marginal note: Theod. Procul.]
the first, and they draw something from Him who is of Himself: and He is the fount and origin of all:
otherwise they would flow into nothing. Since, therefore, all things have both being, and natural power, and
glory, and adornment from God, all things participate in divinity itself, but
in diverse ways: All things (says Origen) have from God the Father, that they may be: from the spirit [Marginal note: Origen.]
of life, that they may live: from the Son, that they may understand and have a portion of reason: from the Holy Spirit, however
(who is nevertheless the same as the spirit of life), that they may be holy. Therefore, something divine
is inherent in all things: In this, indeed, to be only simple or composite: In that, to be
and to operate: In another, however, to be, to operate, and to understand. But leaving other things aside, let us speak of
man: to whom all things have been communicated, so that he may bear the most perfect image of God and the Father:
Hence, he can deservedly be called the Son of God, as the royal
prophet sings: I have said, "You are gods, and all of you are children of the Most High." And since God communicates Himself more [Marginal note: David]
to him whom He wishes to make more exalted and perfect, it was fitting
that He should adorn him, whom He constituted head of others, redeemer, king, and eternal priest,
more with divinity, which is called oil in sacred scripture, as
the prophet again sings: "God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of gladness above your companions," [Marginal note: Idem]
to such an extent that He made him more excellent than all in the communicated divinity itself:
Hence, by antonomasia and a certain hyperbole, he is called God. Another
reason is also readily available: because since man was made capable of divinity, in which alone he can
rest and be blessed, he ought at some time to have attained it: and to be united with
the same: by which union not only is God brought into man, but rather
man into God Himself, since it is of all-encompassing virtue and efficacy: And the more
this God is united with someone, the more He renders that person God. It is not surprising, therefore,
if He rendered this Messiah and Christ, to whom He offered Himself with that fullness, and which
man can receive, such that we can deservedly call Him God Himself: who
also gave to others the power to become children of God. Let us add another reason, that
just as all things are contained and recapitulated in man, so all things ought much more to be recapitulated
and united in God through man: Indeed, through that man
who ought to hold, and does hold, the first place among others: and who drew all things
to himself, so that he might lead all things back to God. Nor let some contend,
saying that this union does not argue for divinity in the united one, but only a conjunction—
AA

--- Page 510 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

Indeed: for the highest Truth itself declares what this kind of union is, while saying:
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] "I pray, Father, that just as I and You are one, so also they may be one in You." But what their union is, He expresses elsewhere, saying: "I am in the Father, and the Father is in me." And again,
[Marginal note: Paul] "I and the Father are one." Which Paul also openly admonishes with his voice: "He who adheres (he says) to God becomes one spirit with Him." If therefore all can be made one spirit with God, why will not he be united with Him, who by antonomasia is called Messiah, Christ, and Anointed, namely by that divinity with which he was so full, that from his fullness we all receive?

Nor indeed (to proceed further) ought man, a creature of every kind, to be repaired by another than by him through whom he had been instituted: But all things were instituted and made through the Word, which was made flesh; therefore all things ought also to be repaired through that same one. And so that redeemed angels and men, and all things contained within them, might be indebted to the most honorable liberator: it was fitting that the liberator, to whom all things would be committed, should be the most excellent of all: which cannot happen except through a more fully shared divinity. Nor ought restitution and reparation, which are esteemed greater than institution, to be made by an inferior than by him through whom the institution itself had been effected: But this was done through the Word of God, therefore that also ought to be done through the same, since no greater means could be had, through which it could have been done.

Moreover, since the entire human creature had sinned, such a fall could not be repaired by a delinquent. Nor ought it to have been done by an angel, who is considered by the wise to be lesser than man, to whom it is given to transcend all angelic choirs: which could not be accomplished, unless man pre-existed in power greater than the angels themselves. Nor was there an angel, or any other creature, except man of every kind, capable of union with
[Marginal note: The same] the Creator of every kind; therefore the apostle said: "He nowhere takes hold of angels, but of the seed of Abraham."

Moreover, sin itself, since it was against God, could not be repaired except by God: For ignorance was not involved: because this, given as a punishment for sin, ought not to precede the fault. Nor was it mere fragility, because sensuality had not yet rebelled: But pride was present, which caused both angels and man to apostatize from their Maker: because each had presumed to claim for himself a more eminent rank than was fitting for him: For it had been granted to man to emulate the condition of all creatures, but by no means that of the coming Christ. Hence all better and rational trees, or trees of virtues, had been permitted to him for food, except the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, which is Christ: who at the same time ought to experience, and did experience, the good of beatitude and the evil of our passions: This rank, he (man) desired to undertake, presuming not out of ignorance or fragility, but rather out of an excessive and most lucid knowledge: Whence his sin was as if against the Holy Spirit: which is complete despair, or excessive presumption, or stubborn malice, or the crime of lèse-majesté. Which crimes could not be expiated by any sacrifice, nor purged by the law, according to that
[Marginal note: Paul David] saying of the Apostle: "By the works of the law no flesh shall be justified before him." Hence David, perceiving that he had fallen into a lesser crime than lèse-majesté, while he sang psalms and prayed for his sin, said: "For if you had desired sacrifice, I would have given it, indeed;"

--- Page 511 ---
holocausts you will not delight in. And these are the sins by which man was so stripped bare, that no covering elaborated by art, or ingenuity, or human strength, or provided by nature, sufficed for covering. Hence, God, not content that man had covered his nakedness with a loincloth woven from fig leaves, clothed him with a tunic of skin, indeed made from the skin of that Lamb, of whom the Bap- [Marginal note: Ioã bap.] tist said: "Behold the Lamb of God, behold him who takes away the sins of the world." And that that scripture speaks of Jesus our redeemer is manifest from the rearrangement of the letters of the Hebrew text of those words: "And he clothed them:" And this, according to the most celebrated doctrine of Hebrew Theology, we will nevertheless, God willing, refer to in its proper place: Hence neither human virtue, nor legal sacrifice could cover that sin: And since we are taught these things by sacred scripture, therefore it must be seen what it itself states concerning this nativity of Christ.

The same is corroborated by prophecies. Chapter II.

IF therefore we prove divine things by divine oracles, let us come to the divine prophets raging with the fury of the Holy Spirit. The royal prophet, a most elegant type of Christ, [Marginal note: David] sings in his person: "Adonai, or God, said to me, 'You are my Son, today I have begotten you.'" For there is no other son who is "today," that is, continuously, begotten by God the Father, except God the Son himself, who is the Messiah and Christ: against whom the chief priests had conspired, and the nations and kings of the earth had gathered together, namely Pilate [Marginal note: Pilatus Herodes] and Herod with their attendants. And he is the one to whom the nations are given as an inheritance: and his dominion is extended even to the ends of the earth. Isaiah also, after he promised the birth of a young woman, or a virgin, [Marginal note: Isaias.] as a sign of the divine covenant, reconciliation, and peace, added: "And his name shall be called עמנואל Himmanuel, that is, God with us," indeed in a more excellent way than it ever was before. And again, while he prophesied concerning a child to be born, and a son to [Marginal note: Idem] be given, he said: "And his name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, Angel of great counsel (אל גבור El gibor), that is, Mighty God, Prince of Peace, Father of the age to come." Nor let the Jews contend, saying that אל signifies "strong": because it would be an incongruous expression to say "strong strong": For in its proper meaning, גבור *gibor* is called "strong." But אל in common usage signifies God. Nor could any man be the Father of the age to come (which is the paradise of delights, as the wise Hebrews teach), nor an introducer to it, since the whole of humanity was expelled from it in the first man. But if the Father of the age to come is understood as the father and giver of blessed life, which I consider the same, no one can be this father, or of eternal life, except he who has it from himself, being the true Lord of blessedness, who is God alone in Christ saying: "I give eternal life to my sheep." [Marginal note: CHRI STVS. Ierem.] Jeremiah, however, foreseeing this same thing with clear insight, addresses God himself, who is to be made human, in familiar speech, saying: "Why will you be a settler and a stranger in the land, and like a traveler turning aside to stay in an unusual manner?" And because he was found in appearance as a fragile man, and subject to passions, therefore the prophet continues: "Why will you be like a wandering man, and strong, who cannot save?"

--- Page 512 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

for He was like a leper, and a man of sorrows, and subject to our infirmity.
But however these things may be, God Himself is beneath the cloak of humanity: Whence
the prophet further continues: *But You are in us, O Lord, and Your name has been invoked upon us.*
Which words more clearly than the sun express the divinity of the Messiah, since it was said
that He would be a stranger among us: and that He would be among us, namely in a certain unusual
way: and that the name of God would be called upon us, that is, upon man, namely the Mes-
siah, who was peculiarly called by the name of God, as it expresses elsewhere, saying:
[Marginal note: The Same] *Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord, and I will raise up to David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign, and shall understand: and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. In those days Judah shall be saved: and Israel shall dwell confidently: and this is the name by which they shall call Him: YHWH, Adonai, or Our Righteous Lord:*
By which name (as all wise Hebrews assert without controversy) no one can be called except God, and the Messiah
[Marginal note: Targum] full of divinity: of whom (as all agree) the prophet speaks: Which also the most celebrated Chaldaic interpretation, the Targum, expressly has, saying thus: *And I will raise up to David a righteous Messiah.* Which Messiah is appropriately called David, and son of David: because He is of his seed: and because He had a true kingdom, which preceded the words of the Davidic kingdom: and because there are many mysteries in David, now to be passed over in silence, through which, often assuming the person of the Messiah, he speaks of Him under his own person and name, such as that: *The Lord said to me, You are my Son, this day have I begotten You,*
[Marginal note: Moses Bilham] and many things of this kind. But let us ascend to Moses, from whom we ought to have begun: For here he introduces Bilham, seized by the Spirit of God, having foreknown these things concerning the future Messiah and His divinity: לֹא אִישׁ אֵל וִיכַזֵּב וּבֶן אָדָם וְיִתְנֶחָם : Which (whatever our translation may have) is interpreted word for word thus: *Not a man, God, and He will lie: and a son of man, and He will repent:* The sense of which sentence is: It cannot be that the Messiah, when He is God-man, should lie, so that that 'not' refers to the verb 'lie', as if it were said: God is man, and He will not lie. And that it speaks of the Messiah is most clearly evident from what follows: For it says: *And the Son of Man, and*
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] *He will repent?* Indeed, the Messiah called Himself thus, as in that: *Whom do men say that the Son of Man is?* and in many other places. It follows: *He Himself said, and it will not be done: He Himself spoke, and it will not stand?* Which things, so that we may declare something of hidden mysteries,
[Marginal note: The Same] let us bring forth. All prophets failed in something except Christ: who therefore said: *Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.* For Moses
[Marginal note: Moses. Jonah. Elijah] failed, since he did not lead the people into the promised land, as he had foretold. Jonah failed with the Ninevites, because the city was not immediately submerged after forty days, as he had prophesied. Elijah failed with Ahab, to whom he had foretold many evils to come in his time: but God, because of Ahab's repentance, deferred those evils until his death: whence what the Prophet had said was less completely fulfilled. And other prophets failed due to some change made in those to whom they had prophesied: so much so that the prophecies of all of them were sometimes found to be conditional: and they were seen, and in a certain respect were liars: but Christ, God,

--- Page 513 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 187

and man was never found, nor will he be found, a liar: nor will his words be changed,
or fail. And that Bilhan was speaking of Christ himself we can clearly infer
both from the words adduced, and from those which follow: For he adds: "I have received a blessing: I will bless, and I will not be changed: for iniquity is not seen in Jacob, nor fraud
in Israel:" although our translation has, "There is no idol in Jacob, nor an image
in Israel." However, pursuing the truth of the letter, we clearly perceive
that concerning that people full of iniquity, rebellion, and fraud, that statement could not be verified,
that in it there was no iniquity and fraud: but only in the Messiah to be born from that people:
in whose mouth no lie or deceit was found: and who did no iniquity: as Isaiah says.
Therefore, because of Him, Bilhan could not curse that people [Isaias] and its progenitors.
The Prophet continues: "The Lord his God is with him, and the shout
and royal applause are in him:" because he was the true King of kings, and Lord of lords,
born from the royal lineage of Judah. It follows: "God led him out of Egypt," that is,
from the distress and prison of human calamity: And also literally, He recalled him from Egypt after
Herod's death, as is found in the Gospel according to Matthew. [Matthæ.]
It follows: "His strength is like the Re'em," which is the most powerful of all animals: in our translation
called Rhinoceros from *rhin* which means nostril, and *keras* which means horn:
because it has a horn on its nostril, differing from the unicorn, which has its horn on its
forehead: and is called in Greek *monokeros*, that is, unicorn. It also differs in
ferocity and body: because the former has an equine body, while the latter has a bovine body: Hence by
some it is called the Egyptian ox, as Sextus Pompeius reports. [Sext. Pō.]
This animal opposes the elephant, fighting with it, its horn first sharpened on rocks,
similar in length to it but having shorter legs, boxwood-colored, with a somewhat humped body,
horrible in appearance, and of immense strength: Therefore, the Messiah, excelling all in virtue, and
heavenly strength, is likened to that most powerful animal. Zechariah also speaks so openly [Zacha.]
of Christ's birth, that nothing is clearer: for he introduces God speaking over
Israel, and after many things saying: "And I will pour out upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace, and prayers: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced."
For God could not be pierced, except in some assumed body: But
He is not read to have assumed any other body than that of the Messiah: nor was it fitting that He should assume
one while rejecting the other. Therefore, he speaks of the Messiah, in whom dwelling, He was pierced by a
Roman soldier: who, when He was wounded, immediately looking upon Him with a better eye, exclaimed, [Longi.]
saying: "Truly this was the Son of God:" Concerning whom all things that precede, and follow,
have been said without doubt: For never was the spirit of His
grace and prayers so widely diffused as in the time of the Messiah: when He appeared
to many praying in visible form, and with fiery tongues: Nor was anyone ever pierced, who with such
great solemnity was beheld by the surrounding people with bodily eyes, and in all
past times was beheld by all believers with the eye of the mind, and contemplation, not without
tears, and weeping: Concerning whom, regarding the great lamentation to be made by various
families, the prophet added: And it is indeed wonderful that for fifteen hundred years since then
AA iij

--- Page 514 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

Let the death of our pierced Jesus always be lamented publicly by the people on the day of preparation, and daily in private chambers by the devout. Which was never done for anyone else, at least after a year.
[Marginal note: Haggai]
Haggai also professes Christ's divinity, if not in clear, at least in obscure words, if Jerome interprets it well.
[Marginal note: Jerome]
For he says: "Yet a little while, and I, who indeed moved heaven when my voice was heard; I moved the earth when I was giving the law, and darkness and a dark whirlwind, and the mountain seemed to burn; I moved the Red Sea when I provided a way for the passing people; I moved dry Egypt, empty of the worship of God, through ten plagues; and covering the people in the wilderness by day with a cloud, and by night illuminating with a fiery pillar, feeding them with manna; I will yet move heaven, driving away the sun and bringing darkness at the death of him desired by the people and my beloved Son; I will move the earth with a great earthquake, splitting the hardest stones, opening and terrifying tombs so that they may give up their dead; I will move the sea, with the dragon cut down, who in it with many reptiles was capturing nations; I will move the dry land and the wilderness, filling it with contemplative and solitary men; and I will move all nations to receive the law and the worship of God, which had only been received by the Hebrew family and a

--- Page 515 ---
**FIRST TONE. 188**

You rule the power of the sea, and You calm the movement of its waves: as He did, commanding the wind and the sea, in which the disciples were tossed. You humbled, like one wounded, the proud devil, casting him out, that is, outside. With the arm of Your strength: not by invoking, as the prophets and other saints, You scattered Your enemies. Yours are the heavens, and Yours is the earth: You founded the world, and its fullness: You created the North and the sea together with the Father: concerning whom You said: "All things have been given to me by the Father." Tabor [Marginal note: CHRIST] and Hermon will rejoice, as was clearly evident in the Transfiguration. Yours is the arm, that is, strength with power: therefore Your hand will be strengthened, namely in the works which You will do: so that no one can destroy or snatch anything from Your hand: and Your right hand will be exalted, accomplishing these things. Justice and judgment are the preparation of Your throne: mercy and truth will precede Your face: as was fitting for Him to whom all judgment has been given by the Father. Blessed is the people who knows and experiences the jubilation that is under Him. O Lord, they will walk in the light of Your countenance: for He is the true light enlightening all. And in Your name they will rejoice all day long: when it will be given to them in Him to speak with tongues, to cast out demons, and to heal the sick: and in Your righteousness they themselves will be exalted, namely, those who are relieved: who cannot advance by their own merits. For You are the glory of their strength, since nothing can be done without You. And in Your good pleasure, by which You called us, our horn will be exalted: For our assumption is of the Lord: and of the Holy One of Israel, our King: who called us out of the world, that we might bear fruit. Then You spoke in a vision to Your saints: and said: "I have placed help upon one who is mighty, and I have exalted one chosen from My people: I have found David My servant." Here the Father is introduced speaking not of David, son of Jesse, but of His own Son, Christ: who is called David in many places. With My holy oil, that is, with divinity, I have anointed Him above all His companions: For My hand will help Him, and My arm will strengthen Him: Therefore the Son said: "My Father [Marginal note: CHRIST] does not leave Me alone, but is with Me." No enemy will prevail against Him, and no son of iniquity will be able to harm Him: according to that declaration by the Son: "For the prince of this world is coming, and he has nothing in Me." And I will cut down His enemies before His face: and I will turn those who hate Him to flight: as it is said in another psalm: "I will make Your enemies Your footstool," [Marginal note: Psalm.] And My truth and My mercy will be with Him: from which He Himself became truth, and full of mercy and grace, so much so that from His fullness we all receive. And in My name His horn will be exalted: For the Father took care to glorify Him. And I will place His hand in the sea, that is, in the exalted and super-mundane, and His right hand in the rivers: concerning which we have discussed above. But let us see how clearly it implies: "He will invoke Me, 'You are My Father, My God, and the upholder of My salvation'": therefore He called God Father: Which mystery the darkened Jews, not understanding, wanted to stone Him for. And I will make Him My firstborn among many brothers: from whom (says Paul) [Marginal note: Paul] every fatherhood in heaven and on earth is named, Exalted above the kings of the earth: from which He was seen and proclaimed as King of kings by John. Forever I will keep My mercy for Him, and My faithful testimony to Him: Therefore the Son says: "This cup is not-"
**AA iiij**

--- Page 516 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

[Marginal note: CHRIST.] [This chalice of the] new and eternal testament is in my blood. And I will establish his seed for ever and ever: by which he regenerated us into a living hope according to the spirit. And his throne, like the days of heaven: Which cannot be verified concerning the son of Jesse, since his throne failed. And a little lower down it corroborates the saying: "Once I have sworn by my holy one," that is, in Christ the holy one, or in myself the holy archetype, "if I lie to David," since neither the Father giving nor the Son receiving can lie. His seed, spiritual namely, will remain forever. And his throne like the sun always persevering in the same way in my sight: and like the moon perfect forever: Neither of which had a place in the son of Jesse: because neither did his throne shine with the same continuous light and glory as the Sun: nor was it like the Moon perfect forever: For even if it was full in David himself and Solomon, like a perfect Moon, it was nevertheless diminished in Rehoboam, and utterly extinguished in Jeconiah, with him and the people led away into Babylonian captivity: n. And a faithful witness in heaven: For no other witness is found in heaven [Marginal note: John. The same] (if John thinks correctly) except the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit: who are three in one. Hence elsewhere he said with great mystery and consonance with the Psalmist: "And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead." The prophet then continues a domestic complaint with the Father, that He permitted the Son to suffer so many and such unworthy things, saying: "But you have forsaken, abhorred, and been enraged against [Marginal note: CHRIST.] your Christ:" Therefore, before all who heard, he cried out on the cross to God the Father, saying: "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?" as something abominable, and hostile, hated, struck, and humbled. You broke the covenant of your servant, that is, of human nature, with which he was united by an eternal covenant, and you seemed to abandon it to death. You profaned to the earth the diadem, or holy crown, with which you had crowned him, and established him over the works of your hands. You scattered, or removed all his hedges, or fortifications, namely the guardianship of angels, so that neither a legion of them, nor an angel, nor a man was there to help him: but he alone trod the winepress of the cross. You made his strongholds a terror, or a breaking: because even the angels of peace wept bitterly. Thus it continues to the end of the hymn about the progress made concerning this God-man in his passion, which [Marginal note: Baruch.] he sustained in human nature for the whole human race. Let us hear how clearly Baruch also (although it is not held in the Hebrew canon: because nevertheless it is in the Vulgate translation and common use of the church) speaks of the divinity of the newest legislator, who is the Messiah: "This (he says) is our God, and no other will be esteemed beside him: He found out every way of discipline: and delivered it to Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved, giving law and precepts, and ordaining sacrifices: After these things he was seen on earth, and conversed with men, made flesh, and teaching with open mouth what he had previously delivered enigmatically in the law and the prophets: so much so that the disciples said: 'Behold, you speak plainly, and utter no proverb.'" But from the many oracles which we could adduce, let these few suffice, for those who do not believe these will not believe others either.

--- Page 517 ---
**FIRST TONE.**                                                                    **189**

**How divinity and the Word are in Christ himself. Chapter III.**

[Decorative woodcut initial Q depicting a seated figure, possibly a scholar or saint, at a desk] Although the manner in which the Divinity was and is in our Redeemer is difficult and almost impossible to explain, indeed not even perceptible to the intellect, since Damascene says that the incarnation of the Word was unknown even to the highest Seraphim, not only as to the time, but also as to the manner, nevertheless, as far as God has permitted us to speak, we will try to explain how divinity and the Word are in this man, the Redeemer. Something of the father is always found in the son through the seed by which he is generated: Hence Aristotle in his [Marginal note: Aristotle.] Ethics concludes that the father loves the son more than vice versa: because he feels something of his own in the son himself: whence in many things appears not only the paternal spirit, but speech, voice, manners, appearance, facial features, body stature, and the like. But God, although he is the parent of all things by a certain analogy, is in a more perfect sense the father of man: who bears his image, than of other creatures, who only enjoy his trace. Therefore, man feels and contains something of divinity more excellent than other created things: because we are his peculiar race: as the wise Aratus says: And before him Pythagoras says: A divine race is inherent in men: With whom that wavering semi-Pythagorean says: Man is born: whether that maker of things made him from divine seed, And a much, and incomparably greater gift of divinity ought to be in him, who is antonomastically called the Son of God, and through whom other sons of God are made.
[Marginal note: Aratus]
[Marginal note: Pythagoras. Ovid.]
Not only is the seminal virtue of God in all created things, and especially in man, but there is a continuous influx of that divinity, just as the continuous diffusion of the sun's rays illuminates and cherishes all places: to which it always comes beneficently, providing life and fruitfulness: Which we prove with clear light, while through its approach to us the earth is made fruitful: plants sprout: animals grow eager for generation and offspring: birds hasten to produce and cherish eggs: and fish, by scattering their eggs, provide the greatest increase to their kind: And conversely, when it recedes, generation seems closed: and plants lay down what they had previously produced when made fruitful: Hence, if the abundance of the sun itself were uniform, the same fruitfulness would always be equal in all things. But the highest and super-mundane Sun, since it neither approaches nor recedes, because it is always everywhere, is always diffused in all things according to their capacity: And always flowing in all things, it preserves their being, continuously bestowing and suggesting fruitfulness and the power of working, unless the weakness of the recipient obstructs it: Hence, the more disposed one is, the more one perceives the abundance of divinity: Knowing this, Jeremiah [Marginal note: Jeremiah.] said: But you are in us, O Lord, and your name is invoked upon us, that is, the power of the name, and of the one named, is perceived in us: For the name of God is the same as God himself: and the power of the divine name is the power of God, if the wise Hebrews, [Marginal note: Wise Hebrews.] interpreting thus, feel correctly: Just as concerning the angel sent for the protection and guidance of Moses, the Lord [Marginal note: GOD] testifies, saying: Behold, I send my angel, who will go before you: Observe him, and listen to his voice: for my name is in him,

**AA v.**

--- Page 518 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

that is, the power of my name, and of my divinity: as those cited above explain. And so much had the power of God's name passed to Christ, that He himself obtained that name, in which all things bow the knee: and in which all wonders are performed: which used to be done in ancient times in El Shaddai (שדי) up to Moses: And from Moses up to Christ in that great four-letter name YHWH (יהוה): Christ, [Marginal note: CHRIST.] feeling the power of these names fused in Himself and in His name, said with great authority: "In my name they will cast out demons: they will speak with new tongues: they will take up serpents: and if they drink any deadly thing, it will not harm them: they will lay hands on the sick, and they will recover." Therefore God flows into all things, filling all things according to their capacity, just as air fills every space not occupied by another body: because all things are full of Jove (God): which can be understood of air, and of God. And just as the whole body is filled by the soul, so that it is whole in the whole, and whole in every part, but in a certain more eminent way in the brain, and in the heart (as a medium for the senses), and lowest in the other members, So also in [Marginal note: Jeremiah.] this mundane body is God, saying through Jeremiah: "I fill heaven and earth:" Indeed, He fills the earth, and the elements, and other lower things more loosely, middle things more fully, but the highest things most fully: Which highest things are angel and man, whom He fills as heart and brain, not only with common life, but with rational, intellectual, and free, or loving life. Nor does God fill these mundane members with less power than the Sun fills the spaces of the world, and the soul fills all members of the human body. Therefore God is in man, but most especially in Christ through seed, through afflu- [Marginal note: Theologians.] -ence, and through repletion. He is also (as more recent Theologians teach) through hypostasis, or person, which they attribute to Christ Himself, and to our Anointed One: because they see works transcending the limits of human nature, which necessarily come from the individual subject: because actions belong to individual subjects, or particulars. He is also through in- [Marginal note: James] -sertion, as James says: "Receive the engrafted word." Indeed, it is an appropriate metaphor: because therein two natures united together by a certain natural, or divine, and supernatural glue produce fruit more according to the nature of the inserted shoot, than of the receiving trunk. But Christ himself said that He was united with us by a con- [Marginal note: CHRIST.] -tinuation, saying: "I am the vine, and you are the branches:" so also His assumed nature is united with the vine of divinity by a certain better-known continuation. Other examples could also be adduced of this union of divinity with that assumed human nature, but these suffice for the present.

All things were contained in the divine word.      Chapter IIII.

[Marginal note: John.] [Large decorative initial O containing a face/sunburst] That all things pre-existed in the Word, before they were unfolded into their proper forms, John, the summary and concise describer of this mystery, testifies in plain speech, saying: "What was made, in Him, namely the Word, was life:" Which [he did] not merely from an assertion of the law- [Marginal note: Averroes] - (as the impious Arab blasphemes) as a mere speaker and storyteller, but he brought forth those things which, like an Eagle flying beyond human limits, penetrates- [Marginal note: John] "What (he says) we have heard, and seen, and touched concerning the word of life, bo-"

--- Page 519 ---
TONE ONE. 190

we declare to you. And again: We saw his glory, glory as of the only begotten of
the Father. Therefore, deservedly, the wisest follow him, astonished, not only
among Christians, but also not a few foreigners. Aemilius [Marginal note: Aemili.]
perfectly pursues the doctrines of John himself when he disputes about the emanation of things,
and tries to reconcile him with the verses of Heraclitus. Proclus in Parmenides [Marginal note: Procul.]
so venerates John's doctrine that no one proves it with more or stronger reasons.
Alfarabi also in the book "On Mutable Beings" weighs [Marginal note: Alphar.]
the most divine wisdom of our John, whom he calls John the Christian. Nor does [Marginal note: Platon.]
the doctrine of the Platonists concerning the ideas of things and numbers differ from the opinion of our John. But also
the Hebrew wise men [Marginal note: Sap. He.]
say that ב (bet) is the seal of supreme wisdom, which is the Son of
God: in whom all things pre-existed, sealed and placed as in a house. For
ב (bet) signifies a house, [Marginal note: Dauid]
in which all things existed and were made, just as the psalmist
sings: You have made all things in wisdom. For there were heaven and earth first
produced: And from there flowed the forms of all things, when disposed matters
are endowed. Not perceiving this, the Peripatetics, [Marginal note: Peripate.]
especially the more recent ones, dispute with great controversy about the introduction or inception of forms. But if
we wish to review the older ones, these are of many kinds: [Marginal note: Auerrois]
although Averroes says they are tripartite: For the Anaxagoreans [Marginal note: Anaxa.]
thought that nothing was made anew, but that the forms which lay hidden were brought to light,
believing that anything is in anything. In what sense, however, we have declared elsewhere.
Alpetragius [Marginal note: Alpetr.]
thought that forms were from the substance of heaven: and that essential dispositions were not in things by their particular being,
but from the influence of the first heaven. The Mathematicians [Marginal note: Mathe.]
believed the form itself was given by the stars: Themistius, [Marginal note: Themi.]
and with him some others, determined this matter in various ways according to the diversity of generated things:
For they thought that inanimate things, like elements, were generated from a single form of matter:
But animate things, which are produced by equivocal generation,
such as wasps from the carcasses of horses, bees from the putrefaction of cows,
gnats from corrupted wine, frogs and mice from the decaying earth:
These and similar things they believed to be produced from a form abstracted from matter,
presupposing that everything that is made must be made from something similar to itself.
And since there is nothing similar in lower things from which such things might be generated,
therefore they supposed there were abstract forms, from which or in whose likeness they were generated. But the leader of the Peripatetics [Marginal note: Ariſto.]
with his school teaching, that the producer does nothing else in the nature of the composite,
except by moving matter and transforming it, draws out the form from the bosom of the matter itself:
where it previously pre-existed in potency. And there the Arab [Marginal note: Auerrois]
says: that this opinion has a certain similarity with the view of the Anaxagoreans [Marginal note: Anaxa.]
and Empedocleans: [Marginal note: Emped.]
since both say that the agent separates the form from the subject:
But they differ, because the former separate what actually pre-existed: while the Peripatetics, what pre-existed only in potency:
Avicenna, however, and his abbreviator Algazel, gave [Marginal note: Auice. Algazel]
decrees quite similar to our John's, saying that according to matter
disposed by the heavens and secondary causes, forms are infused by God, the giver of forms:

--- Page 520 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

And this indeed in particular and successive productions: But in the primal production, they believed that first matter, and then the forms determining it, emanated from the same source, namely the divine word. To these is added that illustrious philosopher Cinesius of Cyrene, who philosophizes in this manner, saying: First beings are simple; but nature descending from them is varied in a manifold way: But the first being is most simple, from which middle and ultimate (beings) proceed: But that most simple (being) is God, containing all things through His word.
[Marginal note: Procul.]
But Proculus Dyatocus, theologizing and philosophizing in his Theorems, proves that just as every number proceeds from unity, so every multitude proceeds from the one, in which it was contained virtually. But that one is actually in all things: because in a ternary there are three unities, in a quaternary four, and so for the rest,
[Marginal note: Rab. Sa.]
as Rabbi Samuel treats more extensively in the commentaries of the book whose title is "On the Formation of Things." Thus also that supreme one is actually in all things, sustaining all things,
[Marginal note: Diony.]
as we have from Dionysius in his "On the Divine Names," where he says: "The Monad has every number in itself uniquely, and indeed every number is enfolded in the monad; but as much as it proceeds from the monad, so much is it distinguished and multiplied." Which is to be understood concerning formal and essential number and unity. And to recall the more ancient (thinkers), who confess that all things pre-existed in the divine word before they were unfolded into their proper forms,
[Marginal note: Hermes]
let us hear what Hermes preaches with his son Tat: "O son," he says, "the holy word of wisdom of the holy Lord alone of all things is a mystery, which to utter is beyond man; because from Him is man, and all things, and in Him are all things."
[Marginal note: Plato]
Plato, in the Epinomis, when he discussed the fellowship of divine beings and their equal dignity, says: "And let us render honors, not assigning to one a month, to another a year, to another no lot, and let us exclude no time; but let the whole be attributed to Him, in whom He makes the world run its course: which the most divine word of all things has ordained."
[Marginal note: Ioan. Dauid]
Nothing is more fitting with that which our John says, "All things were made through Him (the Word)," and with that which the prophet sings, "By the word of the Lord the heavens were established."
In the same place, all things are in number, weight, and measure. Chapter V.

[Large decorative initial E] And just as all things are disposed by the Creator in number, weight, and measure, in the same way they pre-existed in that most holy word: In number indeed, because the numerousness of things requires the universality of their exemplars in the archetype, as we have discussed more extensively above. Yet they are there in such multitude that they never depart from the unity of the storehouse.
[Marginal note: Proculus]
Which Proculus also teaches in his theological theorems: "Everything," he says, "that participates in the one, is one, and not one." Thus also the divine persons (as we are taught by our Theologians) are one in the root of the essence which they participate, and three distinct in themselves: But all creatures are one in the source from which they flow (as
[Marginal note: Parme.]
Parmenides most wisely said, though falsely accused of error by Aristotle), but distinct in particular forms; yet again to be united with that one, to whose union the
[Marginal note: Academ. Plotinus]
Academics (Plotinus especially) persuade us with such renown. Therefore, a numerous mas-

--- Page 521 ---
**VOLUME ONE.**

**E** And just as all things are arranged by the Creator by number, weight, and measure, in the same way they pre-existed in that most holy Word: By number indeed, because the numerosity of things demands the universality of their exemplars in the archetype, as we have discussed more broadly above. Yet they exist there in such multitude that they never depart from the unity of the storehouse. This is also
[Marginal note: Proclus]
taught by Proclus in his theological theorems: "Everything," he says, "that participates in the one, is one, and not one." Thus also the divine persons (as we are taught by our Theologians) are one in the root of their essence, which they participate in, and three distinct in themselves. Creatures, however, are all one in the source from which they flow (as
[Marginal note: Parme.]
Parmenides most wisely said, though falsely accused of error by Aristotle) but distinct in particular forms; yet again to be united with that one, to whose union the
[Marginal note: Academ. Plotinus]
Academics (Plotinus especially) persuade us with such renown. Therefore, the numerous mass...

--- Page 522 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

distribution, all intelligence, all reason, all sense, all state, all mo-
tion, all union, all temperament, all friendship, all continence, all discre-
tion, all definition, and all other things (whatever they are) are carved out by Him,
just as they were in that One, from whom all number and harmony of this worldly instru-
ment proceeds, as from unity, as from the fount of all numbers and pro-
portions, all number and vocal harmony emanates: as Nicomachus and Boe-
tius extensively discuss. And this one principle of all things is that, concerning which the
[Marginal note: Moses. Paul] divine teacher Moses says: "In the beginning," that is, in wisdom or the Word, "God created heaven
and earth." Which Paul explains more clearly, saying: "He is the firstborn of every
creature, in whom all things were created."

Exemplary cognitions in the mind of the artisan are called ideas, and are. Chapter VI.

[Decorative initial D containing a scene with figures] We have learned from very many wise men that there are twofold rules in the divine mind and word:
Of which, some are of things to be made by Himself: and these are properly called ideas
from *eidos*, which signifies species and form: Others, however, are exemplars, to whose
goals our works are to be brought, which are also called ideas by a certain analogy.
Ideas are therefore eternal forms, species, and exemplars of things, always existing in the divine mind,
and before things came into being, so that each subject might be imprinted by them as by their
own seals: And now they persevere in their existence: so that the species themselves may always
be preserved, and be eternal: nor are they corrupted or transmuted by the corruption or
transmutation of the individual. And by a certain analogy, even the thoughts of things to be made
[Marginal note: Aug. li.] by us through art are called ideas and exemplars: as Augustine discusses at length on
John. But because they are not exemplars of species and essential things, they are not
properly ideas, but are called so analogically, through which we can conjecture those divine ones:
[Marginal note: Plato.] Which (as Plato teaches) in the paternal intellect is one and a simple idea, universal in
virtue and causality, and in itself, by its virtue, pre-possessing all forms in a certain more
excellent way. This, however, proceeding, shines forth multiplied in Him who has all things from the
Father: And further, it is diffused in some way, divided in diverse places or mansions of the
archetype. It then comes to the movers of the spheres and other intelligences, to whom it committed
the arrangement of lower things, offering them as it were a seed: and commanding them to
execute and bring forth according to the infusion given to them. They, however, unfold through
the heavens as through instruments with diverse irradiations and opportune aspects, trigons,
hexagons, and tetragons, now approaching, now receding: And finally, forms are infused
according to the disposition of the subjects, which they always desire, so that they may be
informed and perfected: just as a woman desires a man, so that she may receive offspring and
generation from him: or that she may enjoy his sex. But all those things are arranged by the
power of the light of the first cause: which from the beginning was commanded to illuminate and
fertilize all things, as the seed, form, and life of all. Hence John said: "And the life was the
light of men": Because that supreme light is theirs, and of all

--- Page 523 ---
**TONE ONE. 192**

...and the life of all. Which life and light is introduced into matter through secondary causes and celestial instruments, just as a form conceived in the mind of an artisan is introduced into the subject through artificial instruments. There are also rules and exemplars in the Divine Word, by which (says Augustine) we ought to live conformably. Showing these, the supreme [Marginal note: August. GOD.] artisan said to Moses: "Look, and make according to the pattern which was shown to you on the mountain." Nor does he speak only of constructing a wooden tabernacle, but of composing a tabernacle and living temple of the living God, which we are; of each one of whom that (tabernacle) with its sacred rites performed there bore a type, as we shall reveal more fully in its proper place, God willing. Which rules even angels (says the same Augustine) [Marginal note: August.] consult in their actions, as a fountain of life and truth.

**Those who have admitted these ideas. Chapter VII.**

[Decorative initial F] Let Aristotle, Proclus, Porphyry, [Marginal note: Aristotle. Proclus. Porphyry.] and other wise men say how much authority the easy agreement of many wise men on the same opinion confers, and how much truth it demonstrates that opinion to have, who often prove the truth of a matter from the common consent of the wise. Therefore, in the matter of ideas, not only Catholics, or all Christians agree, but so many and such great external wise men, that all suspicion can rightly be removed that our people affirm them more by law than by truth. Zeno, the ancient Philosopher, [Marginal note: Zeno.] proclaims God as the principle and disposer of nature, whom he names "logos," that is, "word," which is the intelligence of Himself and of things to be made, and consequently, idea. Which I believe he received from the workshop of Mercury, [Marginal note: Mercury.] who says in Pymander: "Mind, God, most full of the fecundity of both sexes, life and light, by His word, brought forth another mind, the artisan." This God, of fire and spirit, then fabricated seven governors, who encompass the sensible world with their circles, and their disposition is called fate. Then the Word of God connected from the elements of God tending downwards a pure work of nature, and united it to the artisan mind, for it was consubstantial. Behold how piously, how learnedly, how clearly he teaches that all things pre-existed in that most fertile Mind or Intelligence of God, which he calls the Word, according to the doctrine of our John. [Marginal note: John.] But the Mind which it brought forth is another person, but of the same essence, in which artisan mind, that is, the produced Word, it fabricated all things. But first, those seven minds were fabricated, which are called the first separated intellects, according to that supramundane septenary, which septenary the Hebrews [Marginal note: Hebrews.] call "fabric," with which we have declared these intelligences and their orbs to agree. Which seven intelligences or Spirits (as we read in Apocalypse [Marginal note: Apocalypse. Tobit.] and Tobit) are always in the sight of the throne of the supreme Prince, who, disposing of lower things, execute what the supreme one commands, and hence their disposition is called fate. Afterwards he speaks clearly how the Word of God, that is, the conception of things to be made, or in which the conception itself exists, fabricated this mundane work to be united with the first artisan. And just as the Word itself is consubstantial and united to the first, that is, to the supreme Father, so all things which were fabricated through it, it leads to union. And from these, or from their-

--- Page 524 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

[Marginal notes:]
Socrates
Plato
Peripatetics
Plato
Theophrastus
Stoics
Zeno
Plutarch
Timaeus Locrus
Epicharmus
Sphaerus
Iamblichus
Porphyry
Hermias
Numenius
Proculus
Syrianus
Alcinous
Aristotle
Alexander
Averroes

...from a superior workshop, revealed to prophets and holy men, Socrates and Plato learned: who said that ideas exist, separated from matter, in the innermost parts of God, not among the clouds or in the hollow of the Moon, as the Peripatetics or other ignorant people falsely slander. Therefore, let ideas be in the mind or word of the supreme architect, as the causes of things: from which, Plato, proceeding, is deservedly said by Theophrastus to have assigned causes from divine providence above all philosophers. The Stoics, imitating their Zeno, said that anticipated notions in our souls are ideas: But these (notions) are analogical, while those (ideas) in the divine mind are truly so, because according to their likenesses, formless matters are shaped in a specific principle, as Plutarch says in 'De Placitis Philosophorum'. And before these, Timaeus Locrus teaches that the idea is innate, but externally an exemplar, and an assisting cause, or the form of all things that are transformed: with whom Epicharmus Sphaerus, and many other ancients agree. However, later Platonists, Iamblichus, Porphyry, Plotinus, Hermias, Numenius, Proculus, and his teacher Syrianus, expanded this doctrine: the last of whom (Syrianus) so extensively elaborated in his Apologetic for Plato that he published a very extensive volume. Alcinous also, explaining the master's dogma in the book titled 'On the Doctrine of Plato' and in his 'Epitomes', says: Plato held that ideas are not properly of artificial things, like a shield and a lyre; nor of those things that are contrary to nature, like fever and bile; nor of particulars, like Socrates or Plato; nor of very minute things, like dust or a straw; but they are of perfect beings, and immutable notions, always enduring; and certain immaterial measures existing, for the reason that the world is not from chance, but from the highest order, after the manner of those exemplars which were fashioned in the artisan: Which idea in the artisan is one, and a universal cause, virtually containing all things and pre-existing them, but multiplied with respect to the things ideated: because it is of many: Whence in origin it is one, but many from what is determined by it: Which opinion, approved by so many wise men and divine oracles, is judged worthy of greater assertion than Aristotle's heresy or derision: although the obscured Alexander and Averroes held the contrary. And it is remarkable (if Aristotle is well considered) that he himself, even if in words, by some spirit I know not, seems to disagree, yet in reality he thinks nothing else: For he concedes that active power and art pre-exist in the artisan before he comes to his work. Nor is the reason less in the artisan of the mundane fabric, whom, since they did not know when, why, and how he fashioned this mundane house, he denies the fabric itself, and the manner, and the order somewhere; which elsewhere, compelled by truth, he confesses. Perhaps he denied ideas and the world's fabric while, content within physical terms, he professes and teaches: For he asserts in that treatise 'On the World', which is ascribed to him, that this machine was fashioned by the supreme artisan; and in superior philosophy, freed from physical laws, theologizing quite well, he says that just as our intelligence is caused by things and known objects, so the science and knowledge of God is the cause of those things that are: But what, I ask, is the causative intelligence of God for things, if not His Word, through which all things were made? But now

--- Page 525 ---
**FIRST TONE. 193**

Let us return to those illuminated by divine light. Paul, when he was discussing the incarnate Word with the Colossians, drew these things from the storehouse of the third heaven: "He is the firstborn of every creature, in whom all things were created in heaven and on earth."
[Marginal note: Paulus]
Nor indeed were they created by material structure, or in an iron workshop, or a woodworking shop, but through exemplary reasons existing in the Word and in the Son, whom (as he said elsewhere) He appointed heir of all things: through whom He also made the ages. Moses also, when he described the fabric of the world with wondrous art, always mentioned two productions: implying that one was in the mind, the other in external production: Those indeed through the Word, when he says: "And God said: Let there be, let it bring forth, or let us make": But these are described as outwardly unfolded.
[Marginal note: Moſes]
Solomon, judged wisest by the judgment of God and men, when he spoke of the wisdom of God, in which all things were made, places it as produced before the earth, mountains, hills, abysses, or unformed matter, before rivers, seas, and whatever is contained in them: and that it assisted in the making of the heavens and the lower parts, when he says: "When He prepared the heavens, I was there: when by His decree and circle He enclosed the abyss," forming all things, that is, and impressing His measures and order on all things: From which it follows: "When He established the skies above:" or as the truth of the letter has it: "When He drew the clouds from above, and established the fountains of the waters, and set a boundary for the waters, so that they should not pass their limits: And when He ordained the foundations of the earth, I was with Him, אָמוֹן amon," which is interpreted as a master in any art, or an artisan, and a shaper.
[Marginal note: Salomon]
Behold how clearly it professes that in divine wisdom there is an artistry by which all things are formed and moderated: And that is the exemplar and idea of things to be made.

**Who rejected ideas, and for what reasons. Chapter VIII.**

**T**he foremost among those who rejected ideas is Aristotle with his Peripatetics: and this man indeed of gravest authority among those who follow only sensible doctrine and inferior philosophy: who neither piously nor justly, but in the manner of an ungrateful disciple, deriding his master, says: "Farewell, ideas of Plato: for they are nothing, or they are monsters": deeming it superfluous, ridiculous, inconvenient, and false to admit ideas themselves.
[Marginal note: Ariſtoteles]
He indeed deemed it superfluous: since for the first agent, its object, which is its essence, through which it operates all things, and in which it contains all things, is sufficient. Ridiculous indeed, because God does not need an image or a paradigm through which to know something else, just as man needs a sensible or intelligible species. It also seemed inconvenient and absurd to them that corruptible and temporal things should be generated from those eternal forms. And since ideas are relative, because they refer to ideated things, they cannot exist in that most simple substance, alien from all imperfection. It is also absurdly said that they contribute to number, since equivocal things exist of a different nature from numbered things. Furthermore, they believed it false that through those exemplars, produced things are assimilated to the artisan: as the supporters of ideas assert.
BB

--- Page 526 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

SECOND CANTICLE

...as the proponents of ideas assert. In reality, however, it is seen that produced things are not assimilated to the first [principle] except through attributes, the reasons for which are found in the products at a much lower level and through a certain analogy. Hence, even those who are Christians in name, but followers of the evil spirit, waver, considering erroneous and ridiculous what their Aristotle, the most diligent investigator of causes and things, did not imagine. This is especially so, since he was a student of Plato for twenty-one years. Whence it is remarkable that if he had perceived anything good about these ideas from him, he would not have approved it and committed it to writing.

And proceeding further, they judge as trivial that which is asserted even in Christian doctrine, but is not supported by any authority of sacred scripture. And this especially since they believe that everything said about God, about our knowledge, and about the eternity of things can be preserved without ideas: For our knowledge (as they say) is most sufficient through genus in the universal, and through proper difference in the particular, provided that it itself is known: Which determines the species and its own specific form: which is not

--- Page 527 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS.                                                                    194

...are the words of God) inferring about God Himself.
No one saw Him, except one born of Chaldean blood:
Whom the golden seat of the heavens,
And the sublime, holds: whose right hand extends                                                     Idem
To the ends of the Ocean: whom the mountains,
Shaken from their deepest roots, tremble, and though He is of
Immense weight, they cannot bear Him: who, raising the peaks
Of heaven, yet is never absent from the earth:
He Himself is the beginning, the middle, and also the end.

Therefore, it confesses God to be the beginning and the end of all things, and the means by which all things are made, according to that saying of Paul: "From whom are all things, in whom are all things, through whom are all things." Which mystery was explained to Abraham the Chaldean, and to his descendants (who are called Hebrews from their crossing over), and committed to scripture in the book of Formation: which is inscribed to Abraham himself.
Whence also Aristotle, when he discoursed on the knowledge of God Himself in his first philosophy, venerated the Chaldean fathers, yielding to them: because they received it from oracles. Who (as Proclus says, illuminated by some light or other), feasting with God and living in pure splendor, were initiated into perfect and stable Phantasms on all sides, asserting opinions, and considered scientific reasons as trifles and old wives' tales, since those [opinions] are indeed uncertain and doubtful, and not far from an irrational life. But these [syllogistic reasons] are syllogistic and composite: and in no way can they touch the solitary and intellectual nature of the Creator Himself.

However, those easy and fallacious reasons, lest we seem to avoid their cunning, we will now unravel. And first, why Aristotle mocked or scorned ideas, let Themistius and Simplicius, his expositors, and Francis, distinguished among more recent theologians, adorned with the surname "the Illuminated," tell us: The first of these says: "Aristotle always tried to contradict appearances." The next one indeed says: "Aristotle argues more against words than against meanings." But the last, with greater license or zeal for the most divine theology, bursts forth against him with words of this kind: "Aristotle accuses Plato for two reasons: The first is envy, by which he falsely and impiously persecutes his master, from whom he learned much everywhere: as is manifest even to those moderately experienced in Plato's doctrines. The second, because even if he was a good philosopher, he was a very bad metaphysician. But neither in physics was he an inventor, but only a collector, as he himself confesses in the Elenchi, saying: 'If praise for inventions is given to anyone, it is due to me for the Elenchi.' Where, compelled by truth, he did not want to arrogate to himself what he had not done." Therefore, engaged in those rules of argumentation and sensible things, he willingly departed from the divine symposium: in which (says Simplicius) Plato, nurtured, always venerates divine things, and starting from those eternal species and ideas, descends even to the lowest things. But Aristotle, proceeding from sensible things, ascended only as far as his reasons, formed from sensible things, could lead him. "For there are diversities of gifts," says our Paul: "Therefore to one is given the word of wisdom, to another the word..."
                                                                                                                            BB ij

--- Page 528 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

...knowledge, to another kinds of tongues, and suchlike. Therefore to some is given to know in human affairs;
[Marginal note: Cicero] to others to be wise in divine affairs. To others also (as Cicero says) was given the faculty of speech: To others, access to the inner sanctuaries of doctrines: but to both (as he says) he had seen it happen to no one of the Greeks. But what seemed to him concerning himself, I pass over in silence: but let us come to the arguments. They believe that His own object suffices for God: we grant this to them, but we say, that in Him, or in the Word produced by Him, which is the same as the object itself, are the ideas of things: Which is not an object under the aspect of the Son, or of the Word produced, or of ideas: but under the aspect of divinity, or of essence. Nor do the supporters of ideas propose anything ridiculous by saying that God needs an image, when He Himself has constituted Himself the exemplar of things to be made. Nor is it surprising if corruptible and temporal things are generated from eternal exemplars: since there is always need/work...

--- Page 529 ---
**TONVS PRIMVS.** [Page number:] **195**

On the contrary, self-content and sufficient: but ideas in Him are the same as Himself, also imparted to things, but not external. Nor is it inconvenient, according to the Platonic [Marginal note: Platon.]
and divine wise men, that what emanates from the supreme being and participates in it, is in some way one, and in some way not one: in some way the same, and in some way not the same, just as the sun is one in itself, manifold in its rays: and the heat proceeding from it is the same as the sun, and in the recipient not the same: So also a tree is one in itself, manifold in its branches: it is the same as its fruit, and not the same in taste, flavor, and nature: Which is learnedly [Marginal note: Procul.]
and wisely discussed by Proclus in his Commentary on the Timaeus and in his Theological Elements. Thus also John Scotus teaches that the object, as it is in [Marginal note: Ioā. Sco.]
the knower, is the same as the knower, but diverse in its own being. Nor does the Creator use the ideas themselves as an instrument, but as a seminal and impressive force (so to speak) of essential forms, from which an image is left in the recipient, just as a specific form is imprinted by a natural generator: For from a horse comes a horse, and not an ape: and from an eagle comes an eagle, and not an ass. And indeed I wonder why they doubted how that virtue of ideas, since it is like a seminal virtue, moves the passive recipient to receive the form: because the same doubt would exist about any agent, since there is no less application, or what is called virtual contact, in the primary cause than in secondary causes. We could pursue many arguments with such people, but we judge it superfluous, since these things are not to be brought into controversy: but rather to be received with all reverence, giving thanks to God who illuminates our intellect to receive His secrets and treasures.

**What we have from ideas. Chapter X.**

[Decorative initial E] And lest ideas be believed to be in vain, and fabricated by false imagination, let us see what utility we gain from them, which we so greatly revere. From them we have form and specific being, so that we may be preserved and understand: finally, we have our weight and measure. And as for the first point, many dispute about the origin and inherence of forms, whence they proceed: And by common consent the Peripatetics [Marginal note: Peripate.]
agree that corruptible and mortal souls emerge from the bosom of matter, to use their words. Concerning the intellective soul, since it is still doubtful among them whether it is mortal or immortal, nor have they determined whence it comes, but their Prince, [Marginal note: Ariftote.]
speaking doubtfully, says: If there is any form coming from outside, it is the intellective soul: but I truly do not know how one can imagine that a form is drawn out of matter, unless the true opinion ascribed to Anaxagoras holds, that anything is in anything. [Marginal note: Anaxa.]
But they say that there is a potentiality inherent, to be brought into act at some time. But O Peripatetics, who gave that potentiality to matter, and who brings it into act? Nature (they say) bestows this upon matter and the subject, and a particular agent brings it into act by seminal virtue. But what this nature is (as we have said elsewhere) they do not determine, but it cannot be anything other than the first Creator working all things in all, or secondary causes acting at His command and by His power.

**BB iij**

--- Page 530 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

He is therefore the first agent, and the first giver of forms, from whom is all life, form, and order. But since no one gives what he does not have (as the Peripatetics themselves teach), it is therefore necessary that every form be in the Creator, from whom it proceeded: And the forms existing there are ideas, to whose measures we have particular forms and being: And since that being continuously flows from Him who gave it, we have from the ideas, according to which He granted, whence we are sustained, lest we flow away into nothingness: since our being continuously flows: And that which flows, it is necessary that it be sustained in something permanent: For time and motion flow, and are sustained in the permanent heaven: Natural heat flows, and is sustained by food: Water flows in a river, and is sustained by its channel: Finally, every creature flows into nothingness, and is sustained by the divine word: in which all things were created.
[Marginal note: Paul] This is what Paul says concerning the Father, the source of all good things: "Upholding all things by the word of his power." From this we have: whence we may understand from those things which remain unvaried and unchanged: For from these things continuously flowing, and never remaining in the same state, nothing can be known, as Heraclitus of Ephesus, Cyril, Paron, and many others thought:
[Marginal note: Heraclitus, Cyril, Paron] because since the form of mutable things continuously flows, they believed that it was not always the same, nor did it have a determined being: so much so, that neither a definition, which is of permanent and necessary things, can be had concerning them:
[Marginal note: Parmenides] Wherefore Parmenides also asserted that nothing could be known about inferior things, except insofar as they depend on the supreme, concerning which there is true knowledge: Who, after he sang of divine things, then adds concerning inferior things:
Thus far both the mind of truth and undefiled words.
Now, mortal things, also take up a deceptive song.
Behold how piously, how justly, and with what an elevated mind he calls the knowledge of divine things true science, and discourse concerning them undefiled: because they are stable and firm: But the opinion of inferior and mutable things, and deceptive discourse, he judges:
[Marginal note: Aristotle, Averroes] Which Aristotle and Averroes did not see, or did not wish to see: because they did not wish to awaken and take up the eye, which (as Plotinus says) indeed all possess, but very few use: or they did not wish to admit what is taught only in that sacred bipartite scripture: from which, as from a true treasure, new and old things can be extracted, which we sing in a new and old canticle:
[Marginal note: Augustine] Augustine, weighing this, enlightened by sacred eloquence and subjected to the divine spirit, let us hear what he says about ideas, through which we have being and knowledge: "In ideas there is such power, that unless they are understood, no one can be wise." Which, since they are in the incarnate Word, not undeservedly does Paul declare concerning Him: "In whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge."
[Marginal note: Paul, Philo] To this opinion the wisest Philo assents in the book which he wrote, that worse things are accustomed to insult better ones, saying: "It is fitting for all who seek knowledge to raise their mind to God the Father; but if they cannot, then at least to His image, namely the most sacred Word." Ideas also necessarily contribute to number: because in mutable things, and those subjected to continuous variation, enumeration cannot be verified or established. Nor otherwise did the Creator arrange all things in number, weight, and measu-

--- Page 531 ---
**TONVS PRIMVS. 198**

measure, except insofar as they are numbered in the Word, weighed by their own weights, and measured. Seventy weeks (Gabriel said to Daniel) are determined [Gabriel] upon this people, for which we have 'abbreviated': For there are determined there not only weeks, but all things that are done and have been done in this world: and they are weighed, so that they may be harmonious: For (as Pythagoras first, and after him [Pythag.] many proved) the true principle of harmony is discovered from weights: which nevertheless is founded in numbers: And these vocal numbers, together with natural, or formal, and rational numbers, proceed from divine sources, without which, as primary foundations, they would be absolutely nothing.

**That all harmony proceeds from the Word. Chapter XI.**

[Decorative initial block with the letter C]INCE all things are numbered and weighed in the Word, and harmony depends on number and weight, we easily conclude that all things derive their harmony from the Word itself, in which the harmonious degrees of things are numbered and distinguished: Which are also necessarily harmonious, if Proclus, the principal illustrator of Academic doctrine, teaches truly: [Procul.] that every multitude descending from some one needs harmony: by which, namely, it may agree among themselves and with that one. But all things emanated from that one Word, and were indeed made harmonious, inasmuch as they receive from the same unique Word, and by its power tend towards the unity of the first: and are led by its attraction. Hence was received that portion, concerning which Plato says in Timaeus: [Plato.] 'In the beginning, the Creator received one portion from the universe:' For from the fount of the universe, and of all being, one portion was received, which is (if I am not mistaken) the very being of all things communicated by Him who said: 'I am who I am,' [DEVS.] having indeed being from Myself: and moved away from envy, I communicate it to all, distributed only according to their own degrees. Which communication: since it was made to prime matter produced by Him outwardly, therefore Plato follows, that from that one first emanates the dyad attributed to matter itself: because it first obtained duality: For just as from unity the first emanating number is the dyad (if it can be considered a number) so from that supremely one, being communicated was first determined in matter: And he doubles this dyad up to the cube, namely a threefold expansion, beyond which no other is given: Which Aristotle transmits from that workshop of Plato [Aristo.] in the beginning of the book 'On the Heavens'. From the other side, however, which belongs to the form produced second, and third from the producer, it proceeds through the ternary, even up to its cube: in which it concludes every kind of form: through which matter is reduced to act, and returns to the first: Whence form is inherent, as a familiar medium between the most perfect and the most imperfect, and having a certain symbol with the highest and the lowest, so that it may reduce the latter to the former: In which ternary, form, and the giver of forms himself, rejoices: therefore here, according to our most divine Theology, it is diffused into it, communicating it to us in some way: Which the Academics, [Academ.] excited by truth itself, profess: For Proclus [Procul.] says that the soul especially rejoices in this number, sen-

**BB iij**

--- Page 532 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

[Marginal note: Plotinus.]
holds in a certain way a convenience with that, whose image it bears. Plotinus, however,
to whom a naked wrestling-ground was always a care, and one free from enigmas, to propose in
words nevertheless imperfect and obscure, what his earlier Academics and Pythagoreans
enveloped in veils of enigmas, says in the book on the three substances:
That eternal and perfect [being] always generates the eternal and perfect; by which
[Marginal note: CHRISTVS. Plotinus]
the begotten is less than the begetter, according to that which the begotten says: The Father is greater than I.
Plotinus continues: For from that first [being] proceeds that which is greatest after
that first [being]: And this he himself calls intellect, intelligence, mind, and the Word of God.
[Marginal note: Mercur. Zoroa. Pythag. Dauid Ecclesia Orphe.]
Thus also Mercurius calls it the Word of God and mind; but Zoroaster
calls it mind; Pythagoras, together with the Psalmist, calls it God's first-born
wisdom, according to that of Ecclesiasticus: I came forth from the mouth of the Most High, the first-born before
every creature. Orpheus, indeed, in poetic fashion, calls it Pallas born from the
brain of Jove: For wisdom is the offspring of the supreme intellect. Then
[Marginal note: Plotinus Theolo.]
Plotinus continues: The begotten coheres so closely to him who begot, that it seems
to be distinguished only by alterity. But our Theologians say that it differs by a real
relation, not however by essence or substance; although some are of the opinion that they are
distinguished by certain absolute [qualities]. But leaving these aside, let us return to our business. Now
from Plotinus we have two in divine [matters], the begetter and the begotten, not indeed by
animal generation, which he bids to stand far off, when speaking of eternal things: And since
he teaches adhesion and connection between the begetter and the begotten, he also confesses
the Holy Spirit: which we call the bond and mutual love. Behold how
he confesses the Trinity in divine [matters], he who hunts for truth: But they would
perceive better, if they would receive and hear him, who made known all things which he heard from the Father
[Marginal note: Plotinus]
to his more intimate disciples. Afterwards Plotinus descends to the soul:
which he says is the word of the divine mind bearing its image: For it, and all
other things produced, exist by the Word of God, and it itself is a word, not indeed that
essential [Word], and Son of God, but a certain expressive [concept] of the ideal concept: For just as the word
which we utter with the voice, manifests the thought which we conceived in the mind,
so the created thing produced, as a certain word, manifests what God conceived in the mind:
And although any created thing could in this way be called the Word of God, none
however has the image, except the soul: Therefore it also delights in the ternary, in which also its
progenitor [delights]: And whatever trinity of things there may be, it is from the first ternary, from which through the word
all multitude flows forth: In which, since there is similarity and dissimilarity, parity and
[Marginal note: Boëtius Nicame.]
imparity, hence results for you harmony, which is (according to Boethius and Nicomachus)
the concord of equal and unequal, or similar and dissimilar voices reduced to one.
Behold therefore how all harmony also proceeds from the Word itself.

How these ideas are understood by us. Chapter XII.

[Decorative initial E in a box]
It is a Platonic dogma, that natural things are to be learned, moral things acquired by
use, but divine things received with reverence from oracles: because
we cannot [reach] them, except insofar as that supreme light illuminates our

--- Page 533 ---
TONVS PRIMVS. 197

...has illuminated our eyes: Whence not even an angel, whose intellect is not hindered by matter, is able to understand the fabric of God without that divine light. Therefore Moses (as Augustine [Marginal note: August.] understands) with wonderful artifice hints at how all things that were produced became manifest to angelic minds by a certain succession of that flashing light, saying: Just as the reason by which a creature is founded is prior in the Word of God than in the creature itself which is founded, so also the knowledge of that reason first occurs in an intellectual creature not subject to sin through the light of the Word, and afterwards in its own proper kind. From these two cognitions by the same light, as if from morning and evening, a day is completed: And granted that scripture begins from evening, it does so by resuming the succession from the latter part. Augustine pursues many arguments by which he demonstrates that angels do not understand those mysteries unless they have been imbued with divine light: much less can we, burdened by a bodily mass, be carried up to those spectacles, unless our eye is cleansed by divine grace and illuminated by its light: Therefore these things are hidden from the wise and prudent of this world: and are revealed to little ones made innocent of malice, disciples of the true light and eternal truth, which created and ordered all things. And it is indeed wonderful that many are unwilling to believe concerning the generation of the world and particular things to their progenitor and maker, and instead believe Aristotle and Averroes, who neither created them, nor knew their maker, nor the fabric itself, except insofar as it is subject to animal senses. It was enough for them to stay within the limits of their natural philosophy: which treats of things insofar as they are subject to manifold motion. But let them leave those things which are made by God to those who frequent God's own school: and are sometimes introduced into His inner sanctuaries: so that they not only hear, but see, and touch with their hands those things which lie hidden externally: How, namely, from that one proceeded this numerous multitude, From that good, all these things are very good, From that truth, that all these things might be true: From that Word, and supreme intelligence, that they might be knowable and known: From that life, that they might live: From that holy one, that those things which wish to be sanctified might be holy: From that beautiful one, that they might be beautiful: Which the very Word of God manifested in its own part by its goodness, saying: [Marginal note: CHRISTVS,] I am the way, the truth, and the life: And concluding summarily, He says: All things my Father has given to me: who is the immense fount of all good things, so that through me, namely, they may be produced and known.

The necessity of things, and all being, depends on ideas. Chapter XIII.

[Decorative initial E] From the workshop, therefore, of the supreme architect we have that from the ideas themselves we not only receive forms, and continuously flowing being, and the knowledge and number of things, weight, and measure, and consequently, that all things are harmonious, but they also have whence they are, and that they are necessary: which we can prove: For we consider it known to all that no one possesses those things which he strives to acquire and preserve: For we seek truth and wisdom, because we do not have it from ourselves: We seek goodness, and pleasure, and to advance in virtue, and to excel, since these are not in us, but from elsewhere com-
BB v.

--- Page 534 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

...to be acquired/prepared. We labor to preserve our very being, since we continually draw it from another; and finally, whatever good there is, we strive to acquire, as if it comes from elsewhere. But God seeks nothing, since He does not need our goods, says the prophet:
[Marginal note: David, Aristotle.] With whom Aristotle says in the Politics: God being witness, there is no happiness in external things: because He Himself is happy without anything outside Himself. Since God therefore has all things from Himself, but we have nothing, we expect to receive all things from Him, who distributes according to those most just measures which are in the archetype: Which some of the Hebrew wise men teach to be ideas, as the names agree: For an idea is an exemplar, a goal, and a measure of a thing to be made: For a fair and just distributor measures and weighs what he distributes: so that he may give to each according to his own virtue, or according to what he deserves: Thus also God, the most opulent giver, granted that He is of infinite goodness, nevertheless flows according to the exigency of the recipients: but in the primal distribution according to what the order of the universe required. Hence a curtain is placed in the midst of the superabundant waters, which are immense, and between these lower and finite waters. Therefore, through the supermundane heavens, all things to be given are measured, lest more be given to the recipient than is fitting: but all things measured and weighed are distributed by those weights and
[Marginal note: Augustine.] measures, which are not in the things measured (as we said above from the doctrine of Augustine) but in the measurer: And these are the eternal ideas and exemplars of things, from which each thing receives being and gifts, according to a degree and limit which cannot be surpassed: Whence, from the order given by the craftsman, and sealed by his idea, according to the king's command, is the very being of the receiving things and the necessity of being, according to the given form.
Likewise, there are also ideas of virtues, and rules, to which we ought to live conformably.

Chapter XIV.

[Decorative initial L]
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] That laws, rules, and goals of living are described in the Word, was sufficient to prove that of the eternal Word and infallible Truth saying: I am the truth and the way: from which, namely, it emanates, whence all created things are true beings, and whence each one holds the right
[Marginal note: Augustine.] path of living: and from which every judgment is right: Nevertheless, we will also bring forward Augustine explaining what Christ delivered in a few complex words, for he says this in his *De Trinitate*: "In that book of light, which is called truth, are written the rules by which one sees how each person ought to live: and there one recognizes what is just and unjust: There one perceives what one ought to have, but does not have:" Hence every law is described accordingly, and in the heart of the person who works righteousness, it is transferred not by migrating, but as if by imprinting, just as an image passes from a ring into wax, and does not leave the gold: For those [laws] are eternal and immutable. And when he spoke of the heavenly city, he teaches that these rules also guide angels, saying:
[Marginal note: Idem] "The immutable truth, as an eternal law, is consulted by angels in their supernal court: For they are not truth to themselves, but participants in the creative truth—

--- Page 535 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 198

the truth: to which they are moved, as if to the fount of life: from which if they deviate, they themselves will become wicked, and sons of death, as Truth itself testifies, saying. [Marginal note: CHRIST] That murderer did not stand in the truth from the beginning, because there is no truth in him: Whence it was necessary that he should receive it from elsewhere, that is, from the Word: concerning whom incarnate Paul says: [Marginal note: Paul] I thought it not good to know anything among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified: because then he fulfilled all truth by opening the way to the end: to which we tend, by fulfilling prophecies and the law, drawing all things by his power, and offering the most perfect doctrine of living: Which, to declare, he cried out saying: It is finished, [Marginal note: CHRIST] namely every mystery, and the truth completed, which darkened minds do not know, nor whence it comes, nor from whom it emanates. From ancient scripture also we are taught, that in Christ the Son of God, and in wisdom made human, is every rule of living and judging, as she herself speaks in the Proverbs of Solomon, saying: [Marginal note: Solomon] By me kings reign, and lawgivers decree statutes: By me princes rule, and the mighty decree justice. And a little lower down: Now therefore, sons, listen to me: Blessed are those who keep my ways: Hear instruction: and be wise, and do not cast it away. Blessed is the man who hears me: and who watches at my gates daily, and observes at the posts of my door. Moreover, existing in the flesh, he said: I am the door, if anyone enters through me, he will be saved. Whence it follows: He who finds me, [Marginal note: CHRIST. Baruch.] will find life, and will draw salvation from the Lord. From the prophecy of Jeremiah also we have these things concerning him: He found every way of discipline, and delivered it to Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved: after these things he was seen on earth, and conversed with men, united namely to human flesh. Behold therefore how this incarnate Word, who is Christ, and Messiah, delivered all law, and all truth: which is contained in both testaments.

There are reasons governing honorable and base actions. Chapter XV.

[Decorative initial V] Since therefore in the divine Word are all the rules of living well and rightly, from which to deviate is sin, deservedly to the same, in whom these rules are, is committed the discernment of good or evil deeds, as he himself says: The Father has given all judgment to me. [Marginal note: CHRIST,] For he himself will judge the living and the dead, who knows how to discern the merits and misdeeds of all. Which also the oracle of Isaiah testifies, while treating of the Son to be born of a Virgin (who was to be called Emmanuel), saying: [Marginal note: Isaiah] He shall eat butter and honey, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good. Indeed, all the prophets and those fathers ate butter, or milk, and honey, to whom the promised land flowing with milk and honey was given, and to whom it was given to suckle those exalted breasts: But no one ate so much as to be able to discern evil from good most fully, except our Emmanuel, who knew not only the deed, but the hearts of men, as John says: He knew all men. [Marginal note: John.] And he needed not that any should testify of man: for he knew what was in man. To whom, when incarnate, even the royal prophet spoke with the utmost reverence, saying: [Marginal note: David] I will confess to you, because you have been fearfully magnified: wonderful works

--- Page 536 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

your works, and my soul knows them exceedingly. Among which wonders he enumerates this, that he sees all hidden things, adding: My frame was not hidden from you, which you made in secret, and my substance in the lower parts of the earth: Your eyes saw my unformed substance, and in your book all will be written. Thus also the merits and misdeeds of all are noted in the same book, which, beyond all controversy, is the divine Word and that wisdom, which, united with humanity, makes our Messiah and Christ.

Christ is true man full of divinity. Chapter XVI.

<span style="font-size: 200%; line-height: 1; vertical-align: -0.25em;">S</span>I Christ was a true man, since all universally confess it, it is superfluous to dispute. Therefore, why he wished to redeem the human race in assumed human nature, remains for us to examine: The first reason for this is that since in the first man the whole human race transgressed, it was just that satisfaction should be made to the tribunal of God's supreme justice by man, in accordance with God's own law, that each should be punished,
<span style="float:right; margin-left:1em;">Exodus</span>
by that through which he also sinned: and satisfaction must be made by an equivalent, as we read repeated in Exodus
<span style="float:right; margin-left:1em;">Deuter.</span>
and Deuteronomy, that the one who harms another should render life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe: Therefore, man ought to be offered for man: but indeed a heavenly man, and innocent, and harmless from sin, for an earthly man, a transgressor, and a wicked one: so that not only the due penalty might be exacted, but also a legitimate redemption might be made by one not obligated for himself:
<span style="float:right; margin-left:1em;">Paulus</span>
Which Paul proclaims with his resounding words, saying: For indeed through man came death, and through man came the resurrection of the dead: And as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all will be made alive. For neither could satisfaction, which demands punishment, be made, except by him who was subject to suffering. Moreover, he ought to be placed over every work,

--- Page 537 ---
TONVS PRIMVS.                                     199

members. Moreover, since a heavenly kingdom has been prepared for us from the foundation of the world, and we have been appointed to obtain it, so that by hereditary right we might acquire it, the Father raised up man so full of God and filial divinity, that He would not only make him the firstborn, but through him would give to all wishing to live piously, not according to flesh and blood, that they themselves might also become sons of God. And this firstborn, by a univocal and congeneric reason, ought to be a brother with others, if he was to be numbered as their first. Which Paul, conscious of these mysteries, did not keep silent, but said: [Paulus] "Those whom He foreknew and predestined to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might be the firstborn among many brethren." And again: [Idem] "If indeed sons, then also heirs: heirs indeed of God, but co-heirs with Christ." Moreover, He came into this man, in whom through his rebellion all things had been contaminated, so that all things in

--- Page 538 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

giving them the name of divinity, which is above every name: Therefore John says: *See what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called children of God, and be so.*
Just as Christ, in that He is God, contains all things by virtue, so in that He is man, He contains these same all things collected in the same most excellent manner. Chapter XVII.

[Marginal note: Paulus]
[Decorative initial N, depicting figures in a landscape] Not without the deepest doctrine and sacrament, Paul, from the innermost sanctuaries, to which he had once been introduced, brings us the most celebrated eulogy of Christ, saying: It pleased God the Father to reconcile, or to recapitulate, all things in Him: as he expressly feels,

[Marginal note: Hieron.]
and at length Jerome discusses in his commentary on the Epistle to the Ephesians, lamenting that the Latin translation has 'instaurare' (to restore) instead of 'recapitulare' (to recapitulate): For Christ indeed recapitulates all things, containing all things in Himself: For just as in a summary and final repetition of a speech, an orator recapitulates and embraces all things which he had treated diffusely and individually throughout the entire speech, so the supreme Creator, having distinctly produced all creatures, on the sixth and last day produced man, in whom all things are contained. So also in this last time and age, He raised up and showed to the world His Son Christ Jesus, in whom these same all things are contained with much greater excellence than in other men: For in that He is God, He contains the Father Himself,

[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
eternal: *The Father (He says) is in me, and I in Him:* He contains the Holy Spirit, of whom He says: *He will receive from me.* And again *I will send Him to you.* But no one sends unless he produces, say our Theologians: nor does he produce unless he first contains it in himself. He contains all divine perfections, as He Himself clearly pro-

[Marginal note: Idem]
fesses, saying: *All things the Father has given to me.* And again: *All yours are mine.* Which, as they are infinite and immense, so their explanation is impossible: For He contains piety, justice, clemency, fortitude, beauty, dominion, kingdom, all attributes, and all charisms, and all power of creation: Whence He is called

[Marginal note: Idem]
and Himself the maker of the world, and through whom all things were made and are made. Hence He says: *My Father works until now, and I work.* But in that He is man, He contains all things which are connected in man, but with a more perfect mark: just as man himself, united to God, is more perfect, indeed the most perfect of all. Hence He is called the firstborn of all creation, not only in time, but in dignity and perfection: And through the symbol of all things, which He assumed, He perfected and purified all things, as Peter, lodging with Simon the tanner, was taught through the vision of four-footed animals and birds existing in a vessel, which before Christ were considered unclean in the old law, but by a heavenly oracle are declared purified, namely in the time of Christ, who purified all things: For even if this was shown as a type for the purification of the Gentiles,

[Marginal note: Idem]
nevertheless they do not fall away from the truth of the matter. Hence foods were permitted to Christians, which were called and were unclean before Christ's advent: Which He Himself also declared, when He said: *Not what enters the mouth defiles a man:* because indeed they were already being cleansed by Him. For if through Noah the earth was purified ma

--- Page 539 ---
                        VOLUME ONE.                        209

cursed in the sin of Adam, as Lamech is brought forth saying in sacred scripture, after [Marginal note: Lamech]
he begot Noah: "This one will comfort us from the works and toils of our hands,
from the land which the Lord cursed," so much so, that just as the fruit of the cursed earth was un-
pleasant and hateful to God before the flood, whence the offerings and
gifts of Cain from the fruits of the cursed and unpurified earth were rejected, so after Noah
the Lord accepted, nay, required in the law the firstfruits of all fruits of the earth, from which
the curse had been removed by Noah, as the wise Hebrews discuss more extensively. [Marginal note: Wise Hebrews] Therefore much more, and more perfectly, the fruits of the earth, and all things, ought to be purified and cleansed
by Him, of whom the Apostle says: "He made peace through the blood of His cross, [Marginal note: Paul]
whether things in heaven or things on earth." Nor would He have made peace, unless things were first purified
from all uncleanness, by which they were rendered hateful to God: To this is added
that of John: "God sent His Son, not to judge the world, as guilty
namely, and unclean, but that the world might be saved through Him, Him namely purifying,

--- Page 540 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

Christ is life, and the support vivifying all things, and drawing all things
      to himself,                                                                      Second Tone

[Decorative initial M] Manifold, and unique is the life of all.             Ch. I.
Whence all things obtain life.                                                  Ch. II.
What the tree of life is.                                                                    Ch. III.
Where this tree was planted.                                                        Ch. IIII.
How the tree itself is formed.                                                Ch. V.
To whom, and how communicated.                                       Ch. VI.
When, and why the tree was forbidden.                                                 Ch. VII.
How all things live in that tree, and consequently in Christ.
      Ch. VIII.
Christ is the support of all.                                       Ch. IX.
Why not all are sustained by him.                                         Ch. X.
How he was exalted from the earth.                                           Ch. XI.
How, being exalted, he drew all things to himself.                         Ch. XII.
How virtues, and divine powers seemed diffused into many things.     Ch. XIII.
Christ, freeing the human race from this calamity, cast down
      that three-headed beast.                                                       Ch. XIIII.
How he called all other divine powers to himself.                    Ch. XV.
This dominion obtained, and the drawing of all divine powers to himself,
      are proven by evident fact.                                                     Ch. XVI.
The same are proven by prophecies.                                              Ch. XVII.
How he will finally remove all distracting things, so that he may perfectly
      draw all things to himself alone.                                                       Ch. XVIII.
That he will finally draw all who are to be drawn.                               Ch. XIX.

--- Page 541 ---
**SECOND TONE.**
**201**
**THE LIFE OF ALL IS MANIFOLD AND ONE.**
**Chapter One.**

[Large decorative initial N] Unless the Sun, which God lit to declare His majesty, and the soul, which He fashioned with such excellence, were to teach me how one can be manifold or many, I would not indeed dare to say that life is at once one and manifold. For the sun is one in itself, manifold in its rays, one in essence, yet of all kinds in power. The soul is also one in itself, but manifold in operation: For it hears in the ears: sees in the eyes: smells in the nostrils: tastes in the mouth: feels and works in the hands: understands in the brain: loves in the heart: walks in the feet: digests in the stomach, liver, and other digestive members: generates in the instruments appointed for this purpose, so much so that it appears manifold, though it is nevertheless one. Nor is it diminished by the fact that it seems to suffer a defect in some member: For if the eye or hand were weak, it is not thereby less in the brain or heart. From these things it will easily be recognized how that one life would be manifold in its members, if we were to admit that the world is an animal, as many wise men agree, even those who venerate the sacred scriptures, since these themselves seem to offer no obstacle: as Augustine, of most acute intellect and excellent doctrine, decrees: whence he also seems to assent to this opinion. [Marginal note: Augustine.] Origen, however, runs with swift feet to this same opinion: [Marginal note: Origen.] which he strives to prove both with reasons and with the testimony of sacred scripture, saying in his *De Principiis*: "Although the world is ordered with diverse offices, its state is not to be understood as dissonant or discordant: but just as our body is fitted together from many members and is contained by one soul, so too I think the entire world should be considered an immense and vast animal, which is held as if by one soul through the power and reason of God." Which I also believe is judged by sacred scripture through that which is said by the prophet: "Do I not fill heaven and earth?" says the Lord? And again through another Seer: "Heaven is My throne, and the earth My footstool." [Marginal note: Jeremiah.] Which the Savior also confirms, when He says: "Do not swear, neither by heaven, because it is the throne of God: nor by earth, because it is His footstool." [Marginal note: Isaiah CHRIST.] But also that which the Apostle, when he preached among the Athenians, approving the opinion of Aratus, said: "For in Him we live, and move, and have our being." [Marginal note: Paul Aratus.] And how is this, unless because God by His power binds, contains, and vivifies the entire world? How also is heaven the throne of God, and earth His footstool, unless because He fills all things in heaven and on earth? So far Origen. With whom Eusebius Pamphilus, reasoning in his *Theological Solutions* concerning the supreme artificer, says: [Marginal note: Eusebius.] "Life is there, and mind, so that being itself may perpetually remain life, and may fashion and contain for the mind those things which are." Hence, the first being must be vital and intellectual: whence all essence, life, and intellect are named more by participation than by species: For that very being is life in itself, and intellect in itself: Which

--- Page 542 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

[Marginalia: Cardi. Cusa]
but besides these, everything is more non-being than being: because it was, when it was not being. And by this perpetuity, being remains, lives, and understands: For to that extent it is a participant of life, as much as that (being) has provided it; and it understands as much as that (being) has imparted. And he pursues many things in this matter, from which he concludes that there is one life of all living things, just as there is one soul in all the members of the body: which is not only diffused in its own members, but in some way is diffused even to external things: For into sweat flowing from a human, and condensed and arranged, a certain life is infused, weaker than human life, and lice are produced: But from a collection made from breath, the life of bedbugs and fleas is generated. Which happens, either from the disposition of matter, or from a spark of life falling from a human, which, less perfect than life itself, vivifies those subjected things with a lesser quality. And from these things, which are called the hinges of the Christian house, the most ingenious and unique disputant, when he compared the microcosm to the greater world, said: That life of the world, which moves itself and all things, is perpetual, because round and circular motion contains all motion, just as the circular figure encompasses every figure within itself: To which soul the entire corporeal world relates itself, just as the body of a human to its own soul

--- Page 543 ---
**TONVS SECVNDVS.** 204

our [John]: For he says: What was made in him was life, and the life was light, all things
were made through him, and without him nothing was made. Which we can understand
in a double sense: either that nothing was made without him, or that that which was made
without him preserving, filling, and vivifying, is nothing. With these, Orpheus [Marginal note: Orphe.]
in his theology, in a long progression, sings that God is, and is seen in all
worldly members: Which Manilius, pursuing to the letter, sings: [Marginal note: Manil.]
Since one spirit
Inhabits all parts, and irrigates the world,
Flying through all things, and forms the animate body:
For unless the machine remained woven with kindred members,
And the whole obeyed its imposed master,
And prudence governed the whole sense of the world:
There would be no station for the lands, no circuit for the stars:
And the wandering world would stick, and standing, would stiffen.
Nor would the stars keep their appointed courses:
And night, in turn, would flee the day, and again put it to flight:
Rain would not nourish the lands, nor winds the heavens,
Nor the sea pregnant clouds, nor rivers the sea,
Nor the deep the springs, nor would the whole stand as one part
Through all, but rather be divided into parts by an equitable parent:
So that neither the waves would fail us, nor the stars,
Nor would the sky fly more or less than is just:
Movement nourishes, it does not alter the work: thus all things
Remain dispensed in the whole world, and follow their lord.
This, therefore, is God, and the reason which governs all things.
All Platonists, moreover, affirm this same thing with one voice: for it is their peculiar [Marginal note: Platon.]
dogma. And from the many reasons by which they likewise asserted it, we will only
bring forth this one from Plato: For he liked there to be two motions, one proper, the
other external: But that which moves of its own accord from itself is more divine than
that which is driven by an external impulse: And he placed this motion in souls alone,
and thought that the principle of the other motion was derived from these.
Wherefore, since all motion arises from the world's animating spirit,
and this spirit moves not by an external impulse, but of its own accord, it is necessary
that it be a soul: From which we understand that the world is animate: and from this also
it can be understood that there is intelligence in it. But rightly one might doubt, since the world is
an animal, why it is not altered, or weakened, or fails, like other living beings.
Here pleases the solution of Chalcidius, who says in his commentary on the Timaeus: [Marginal note: Chalcid.]
That which is instituted by God is immune from the alteration of age, diseases, old age,
and decay: as all Academics agree, and it is proven by deduction, if those things are well
considered which are narrated by the wisest philosopher Moses as produced
immediately by God, and those produced through secondary causes. Nor should one insist [Marginal note: Mofes]
concerning man, fashioned by the hands of God:
CC ij

--- Page 544 ---
[Graphic of an open book. On the left page is the number "2". On the right page is the number "3" above a crossed-out number "4".]

Incorrect pagination — incorrect date
NF Z 43-120-12

read PAGE 202.203
instead of PAGE 204.205

A part, but distributed in parts by a just creator:
So that neither the waters might fail, nor the stars for us,
Nor the sky might move either greater or less than is just:
Motion sustains, it does not change the work: thus all things in the whole
remain distributed in the world, and follow their master.
This therefore is God, and the reason which governs all things.
But all Platonists affirm that same thing with one voice: for it is their peculiar [Marginal note: Plato.]
dogma. And from many reasons by which they likewise asserted it, we will adduce only this one from Plato:
For he held that there are two motions, one inherent, the other external:
But that is more divine which is moved from itself by its own will, than that which is driven by an alien impulse:
But this motion he placed in souls alone, and from these he thought the beginning of the other
motion was derived. Wherefore, since all motion arises from the ardor of the world,
and this ardor is moved not by an alien impulse, but by its own will, it is necessary
that it be a soul: From which we understand that the world is an animated being: and from this also it will be able to be understood
that intelligence is in it. But who would rightly doubt, since the world is
an animal, why it is not changed, or weakened, or fails, just like other living creatures.
Here the solution of Chalcidius is agreeable, who says in Timaeus: That which is instituted by God is immune from [Marginal note: Chalcidius.]
alteration of age, diseases, old age, and decay: as all Academics
agree, and is proven by deduction, if those things are well considered which by
God immediately, and which are produced through secondary causes, are recounted by the wisest
philosopher Moses. Nor let it be insisted concerning man fashioned by the hands of God: why [Marginal note: Moses]
CC ij...

--- Page 545 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

nor was it itself formed without dust, or earth as an intermediate substrate: Just as the heavens, and the whole machine: which was made immediately by God out of nothing, therefore it itself, as regards its subjective parts, and those immediately fabricated by God, is perpetual and indefectible: so also the soul of man was produced by God himself without an intermediary. There exists also another reason: because the world consists of all its parts, so that no, not even the smallest part of any body, is left outside the world's ambit, which, coming from outside, hot or cold, might cause illness to the world: which is most perfectly proportioned in itself, even though its parts may sometimes appear altered, yet they are consonant with the reason of the whole. Moreover, the world is a complete body, so that it lets nothing flow out from itself, and be diminished, or suffer damage...

--- Page 546 ---
TOMVS SECVNDVS. 205

origin not to have an author: Finally, that there is salvation and perseverance of those things which He has made: Nor is there any thing of such excellent powers that, deprived of God's help, it is content by its own nature: Following this opinion, prophets dared to declare all things full of God. And a little further down: Those things which are prior draw more, whence those celestial bodies, the closer they are to Him, the more they receive from God: Less do those things which are secondary to Him: and thus, down to earthly things, they receive God's indulgence and benefits according to the measure of the intervals, even to us: But since we believe that God permeates all things, and extends to us and beyond the power of His name, it must be considered that He gives more or less utility to things, depending on how far away or how close He is. Nor does this doctrine disagree with that which the Apostle teaches, when he describes degrees in the church and likens every congregation to a body: whose soul and life diffuses itself more or less into the members according to their need and proximity, not indeed of location, but of virtue and symbol.

[Marginal note: Paulus]

What the tree of life is. Chapter III.

[Decorative initial O] It is common knowledge to all that Christ, our Messiah, has been celebrated with many kinds of mysteries and called by many names: For He is called Lamb, Lion, Cornerstone, Christ, Word, Truth, Life, and the like: Thus also He is called the tree of life, which is placed in the midst of the garden of delights, so that it may impart life to all, as we have revealed above. But why He is called a tree, now remains to be explained. A tree is rooted in the earth, from which it receives the increments of life: And Christ is a tree having its root in the land of the living, whence He drew His first origin, although He drew the body and organ of His divinity from a people already dry and arid, as Isaiah says: "He grew up like a sapling from the earth, and like a root from thirsty ground."

[Marginal note: Isaias]

A tree is divided first into larger and fewer branches, afterwards into very many smaller ones: And Christ's most abundant virtue and grace was first diffused into a few Apostles, but great and strong in virtue, and through them into very many others, to whom those [Apostles] are therefore deservedly to be preferred. The tree continually draws increments of life from the earth, to be communicated to shoots, twigs, flowers, and fruits: And Christ lives in that land of divinity and the Father, as He Himself testifies, saying: "As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father:"

[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]

Which life, received from the Father, He imparts to others, so that they may live: whence He adds: "And he who eats me by taking food, like a branch from the trunk and root, he himself will live because of me." And again: "If anyone does not remain in me, that is, by drawing life from me, he will be cast out like a branch, and will wither." Flowers live and become beautiful on the tree, but if cut off, they immediately wither or rot: And the flowers of our thoughts live in that tree, which says: "Without me you can do nothing." Nor can we think anything of ourselves, as if from ourselves, says the Apostle. Fruits also ripen on the tree, continually receiving nourishment from it, just as the tree itself speaks, saying: "He who remains in me, and I in him, bears much fruit."

[Marginal note: Paulus CHRI STVS,]

CC iij

--- Page 547 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

Where this tree is planted. Chapter IIII.

[Decorative initial V] But where this life-giving tree has its roots, we have two testimonies from divine storehouses. One is, that paradise, or that garden of delights, had been planted by the Lord God מקדם *michedem*, which means "from the beginning" or "from ancient times": since the whole garden, and every true pleasure, is rooted in that most ancient eternal Father, the first origin of all good things: or the garden is planted in that divine essence, which is the true land of the living: from which all life, and all delights, and pleasures sprout forth. The other is, that the tree of life was in the middle of paradise: because the divine Word, which is the true tree of life, is the middle person in that most holy Trinity: and clothed in human flesh, conversing with men, it always held the middle position: For being born in the midst of animals, disputing in the midst of doctors, dying in the midst of thieves, rising again in the midst of disciples, he was found. And although he himself, as the Word, as the Son, as the wisdom of God, sits at the right hand of the Father, nevertheless, as teacher, as redeemer, as Messiah, as the tree of life, he stands in the middle of the archetype: just as the life of man, who is in his image, has its seat in the heart, which holds the middle position in the human body: from which life also flows into all members. And although God is whole everywhere, not divided by parts or members, nor consequently is there in him right and left, middle or extreme, according to these our bodily laws, nevertheless, there is a certain disposition, in a divine and excellent way not fully perceptible to us, not of the thing itself, which is most simple, but of an influx with respect to us, according to which we hold his image: and concerning which Scripture is verified, often reiterating about the right, left, middle, east, west, south, north, and similar dispositions of that divine influx, according to which that tree of life is said to be placed in the middle.

How that tree itself is formed. Chapter V.

[Marginal note: Heb. Wisdom] [Decorative initial F] The wise Hebrews figure this tree of life in the best way they can, by the shaft of the letter ו (*Vav*), which is straight like a tree trunk, with that upper part, which is like the letter י (*Yod*) united to that shaft, signifying the supreme fount of life, the eternal Father flowing into the Son: which the Hebrews themselves call the "upper crown": to which they wish א (*Aleph*) and י (*Yod*) to be dedicated: of which one signifies "one" and "beginning": the other "ten" and the completion of numbers: so that it may be intimated that the eternal Father is the beginning and end of all things. And by the continuation and union with that shaft, which figures the tree of life, is denoted the union which it has with the Son: into whom all things flow, so that he himself can also be called the beginning and the end: and all good be attributed to the Son. Hence, with great mystery, God commanded in Exodus to be carved on the columns of the tabernacle וויהם כסף *vavehem chaseph*, that is, "their *vavim* (hooks/clasps) of silver": for which we have "with silver capitals": Which either the translator did not know what it meant, or did not wish to reveal the mystery: For the column of the tabernacle, and of the whole world, after whose pattern it was made, is Christ, and the Incarnate Word: by whom also the heavens were made firm, and the Father carries and sustains all things. In this command, therefore

--- Page 548 ---
TOMVS SECVNDVS.
204

a letter of God was inscribed, which imports life: so that it might be denoted that the principle of life was placed in Him by the eternal Father, so that He might impart it to others, as Christ himself deigned to make clear, saying: "As the living Father sent me, and I [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
live because of the Father, so he who eats me will live because of me." And this tree is distinguished into root, trunk, branches, flowers, and fruits: For the root is the sprouting divinity itself: The trunk is the Word produced in it by the Father: The branches are the attributes communicated to Him by Him who gave all things to Him: Leaves and flowers are living ideas in it: But leaves are ideas of irrational things, which were produced for the service of intellectual creatures, just as leaves are constituted to cover flowers and fruits, and as if for their service. But flowers are ideas of intellectual things, from which due fruits are expected: But just as many flowers fall without fruit, so many angels and men have fallen and continually fall without fruit, and separated from that tree of life, they wither, to be burned by unquenchable fire. But fruits are the rules of good actions for us, and gifts, and charisms, with which we are continually endowed, so that living according to those rules, we too may present the fruits of our works to Him who planted both the tree of life itself and us, whatever little trees we may be, so that from that tree of life we may receive whence we may produce due fruits according to the spirit: of which Paul makes mention, saying: "But the fruit of the [Marginal note: Paulus]
Spirit is charity, joy, peace, etc.," which follow. Nor shall we proceed further concerning the figure of Him who is figured by no figure, yet gives to all things that they may be figured; nor is He enclosed by any boundary, though He encompasses all things within Himself. But let these few things be said, as we have been able to learn from the sacred scriptures.

To whom, and how communicated. Chapter VI.

[Decorative initial I] Beyond all doubt, we hold that all things which rejoice in life draw it from the fountain of life, or receive and eat from the fruits of the tree of lives: But it comes into controversy what are living things, and whether all things live. Indeed, angels, humans, animals, and plants live, each with its own life, as all agree: but concerning metals, stones, elements, and heavens, there is difficulty among some, because since their life does not appear, they judge them to live minimally, and call them inanimate: But if the world is an animal, as we discussed above, and as most wise men agree, there is no doubt that all these things live, just like all the members, flesh, intestines, nerves, blood, and bones in a human or animal body: although bones and such things, when separated, seem deprived of life. But in the body, bones grow, move, and support the body itself, like living columns. Flesh grows strong and is renewed, so that it does not fear a wound or incision; and broken bones are renewed, which certainly does not happen to dead things: Thus also the members of the great and mundane animal live, each with its own life, as Mercury says in that treatise which he calls "Concerning the Common": [Marginal note: Mercuri]
"Everything that is in the world moves either by growing or by decreasing; but that which moves, therefore lives." And since all things move, even the earth,

CC iiij

--- Page 549 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

especially by generative and alterative motion, it also lives. But let us come to the higher
members, about which it is doubted whether they live: and these are the heavens, which he who dou-
[Marginal note: Theop.] bts to live (says Theophrastus) is not considered a philosopher. Nor were there lacking those who
would say the heavens are animals: Which they strive to prove from rational motion and continuous influx,
because they could not provide a living force, unless they themselves also lived. But
descending to lower things, Stones are therefore said to be alive, because they live: For they grow,
condense, harden, and very many of them have various effects:
which cannot proceed except from a living thing. Metals live (as we have said) with a higher
life, into which a certain most hidden spirit is infused from the luminaries and hea-
vens: Which also some emulators of nature strive to achieve, thinking they can transmute
tin, bronze, or quicksilver into gold or silver, by introducing
into them the spirit and life of gold or silver, as they say. Water lives, to which especially is at-
tributed the germ of animals, in that which was said: Let the waters bring forth, or let them creep,
the creeping thing of the waters, or the generation of a living soul. And the earth lives, as we have said:
whose life we easily prove, while we see it most fertile of living plants.
And one part is more fertile than another, which cannot be, unless because it is more vital.
The life of this earth is also recognized from a certain thickness and fatness,
which is increased by the dung of animals falling from a living animal: whence carrying with it in some
way life, it is imparted to the earth with which it is mixed, favoring the generation of living
plants: which could by no means proceed from a non-living thing. But the air contains so
[Marginal note: Ancient Hebrews] much of life, that the Hebrews often call it spirit, spirit I say,
containing and coupling the other elements. But concerning fire I will say nothing, since all
the ancients confess life to be a certain fire, and that it itself proceeds from fire and light.
And all these things together with those which live with an obvious life, according to their capacity, receive life
from the author of life: who is now called fountain, now river, now tree of life:
which diffuses itself into the whole mundane body, just as a particular soul into
all the members of its body, so that all operations which are done through any of its
body's members, may proceed from the vivifying and moving soul: For just as man
speaks with his mouth, sees with his eyes, hears with his ears, walks with his feet, and other
things of this kind, so God, the first life of all, in the sun illuminates and heats, in the stars
infuses diverse things in various stars, in the clouds rains, in the air breathes, in the earth germinates, in
the waters, fishes, and animals operates diversely: So also in diverse men operates
(says Paul) all things in all. And this God and life is that nature
[Marginal note: Aristotle] common operating (force), which Aristotle seems to distinguish from God, while he says: God and
nature, as if she were the companion and spouse of God. Nor is there any other universal nature, except God,
[Marginal note: Socrates Anaxagoras] who diffused into all things, gives to all that they may operate: Which (as Socrates relates in
the Phaedo) Anaxagoras, the contemplator of the heavens, teaches in the beginning of the book which he published concerning the world,
saying: Mind is the cause of all things, the maker and moderator, adorning and filling all things.
And Socrates laments that he does not declare the reason and manner of those things which
[Marginal note: Academics] are done by that first mind. But all the Academics (call) the soul of the world

--- Page 550 ---
TONVS SECVNDVS.
205

profess with one mouth, by which all things live: And the greater part of them believe this to be God.
[Marginal note: Porphyr. Cyrillus]
For Porphyry (as Cyril relates in *Contra Julianum*) said God was first the supreme good, second the Creator, third the soul of the world: so that first He would be in Himself, second He would create things, third He would fill and vivify all things.
[Marginal note: Nume.]
But Numenius, perhaps progressing further than is expedient, says: God the first is subsisting in Himself, but the second and third are one with the first: But that second, adhering to matter, which is binary, is cut off by it: Yet He, with the third, infuses life into things: Which things, however, rightly understood, agree with our Theology in which we say the Father is the first principle of all, and from Him, not indeed a second God, but a second person (speaking in our way), who adhered to matter when He assumed human flesh, or when He went forth into action, impressing forms on things according to the exemplars existing in Him, according to which, forming diverse things, He is as it were cut into them: yet He is not diminished, nor does anything fall away from Him. And these together with the third, that is with the third person, who nevertheless are all one God, infuse life into things: For both the Son is called life, and the tree of life, and the third person is called the spirit of life: because both infuse life into lower things: But the Word, and the Son, gives life to things, so that they may live: while the Spirit, so that they may perform the works of life:
[Marginal note: Dauid]
Which the prophet hints at when he says: that by the word the heavens, and consequently all things, were formed and established, but by the spirit of His mouth is all their power, namely in operating, just as we read in the book of Wisdom:
[Marginal note: Sapien.]
The holy spirit of understanding is mobile, that is, making others move to work: Which, to express it better, it adds: Having all power.
[Marginal note: Paulus]
Thus also Paul divides the works of different ones according to the spirit, finally concluding: But all these are wrought by one and the same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.

When, and why the tree was forbidden. Chapter VII.

**W**e have an explicit doctrine in the sacred scriptures, that God after Adam's transgression said: Behold, Adam has become like one of Us, knowing good and evil: And now, lest perhaps he stretch out his hand, and also take of the tree of life, and live forever, let Us cast him out: Which was also done. Nor should anyone wonder that God seems to have grieved that Adam had become a knower of good and evil: For He took vengeance not for his progress, but for his arrogance: since he wished to discern good and evil, and to decide what was just and unjust: which belongs to Elohim and to judges: in whose synagogue and assembly God stands judging: because man cannot do this without God Himself: Or because he wished to assume the rank and place of the Messiah: who (as we have said elsewhere) is the true tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Therefore, He had forbidden anyone, by emulating the dignity of the Son of God and the Messiah, to claim it for himself, He who is the trunk of true life, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. But this is a mystery too deep to speak of, Therefore let us assign another reason: one that may be understood by all: And that is, lest man, infected with sin, unworthily receive the nourishment of life to his own destruction: For
CC v.

--- Page 551 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

if he had fallen into uncleanness, he would have remained perpetually, and would remain unclean, if uncleanness can stand with that life. Or lest, being unprepared, partaking of the nourishment of life, it should turn to evil for him, just as the best wine harms one with a fever, and the most delicious meat, however well seasoned, harms a pleuritic person.
<br/>[Marginal note: The same] And this is what Paul says about one who is to eat the bread of life: "But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup: For he who eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself." For what the tree of life was to our first parents, that is the bread of life to us; which is forbidden to the unworthy, just as that tree was forbidden to the transgressor Adam, and is forbidden to anyone unworthy and defiled by any crime. Because since crime and sin are the work of death, they can in no way agree with life.

**How all things live in that tree, and consequently in Christ. Chapter VIII.**

<br/>[Marginal note: John] <span style="font-size: 200%; float: left; margin-right: 0.2em; line-height: 0.8em; font-family: 'Times New Roman', serif;">I</span>terated often is that most famous saying of John, that all things, before they came into being, were life in the Word. Nor is it to be thought that, having been unfolded into their proper forms, they are deprived of that creative life by which they lived in the mind of the Creator: But beyond this, they acquire other lives according to their capacity. For life is manifold, therefore this tree is famously known as עץ חיים ez haiim, that is, "tree of lives," and not "of life" in the singular. Therefore all things live by that creative life; and they live by their own natural life, which nevertheless depends on that highest life, and is a ray or spark of it, in whom we live, and move, and have our being. Man also lives beyond his manifold natural life by a certain life of the spirit,
<br/>[Marginal note: CHRIST. Ezekiel.] concerning which it is said: "It is the Spirit that gives life." And this [spirit] favors a twofold life: Natural, according to that of Ezekiel: "And the spirit of life was in the wheels, quickening all things"; Spiritual, concerning which the same prophet [says]: "Come from the four winds, O spirit, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live." For they were dead in sin, and needed the
<br/>[Marginal note: Paul] life of the spirit: concerning which Paul [says]: "If by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live."
<br/>[Marginal note: CHRIST.] Both of these lives, even if administered by the spirit of life, nevertheless proceed from the tree of life, which is the very Word of God made human, which says: "He who believes in the Son of God has eternal life." And again: "For as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son also to have life in himself." And often repeating, he affirms that he is life, to be communicated to others also according to their degrees; through which degrees he intends to lead us
<br/>[Marginal note: The same] into that blessed and eternal life, beyond which there is no other: "I (he says) give eternal life to my sheep." And again: "The Son of Man must be lifted up,
<br/>[Marginal note: Jeremiah.] that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life." The source of this life is the Father, who says: "They have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters." But the Son is the river of life proceeding from the Father's fountain, or the tree of life planted in the land of the living. But the Spirit is, as it were, a pool, receiving the water of life from the fountain and river of lives, and pouring it out into us also:
<br/>[Marginal note: Origen.] Which Origen discusses at length in his commentary on Matthew.

--- Page 552 ---
TOMVS SECVNDVS.
                                                                                                        206
Christ is the support of all.                                         Chapter IX.
[Decorative initial E] ND if we have touched upon Christ sustaining this earthly fabric by His divinity and the power of the Word above, nevertheless, explaining more clearly, we will proceed: For Paul declares this in plain language, first saying to the Hebrews:
[Marginal note: Paulus] 'He upholds all things by the word of His power.' And again he says to the Colossians:
[Marginal note: Idem] 'For in Him were all things created, whether in earth, or in heaven.' And continuing, he again says: 'And in Him all things hold together.'
[Marginal note: Isaias] Which is also strengthened by the prophecy of Isaiah, when he says: 'And the government shall be upon his shoulder,' namely, of the whole structure, establishing Him as heir of all things, through whom He also made the ages. Therefore, He sustains this structure of the earthly house and all its inhabitants, like a column: He rules, like a prince: He feeds, like a shepherd, with the food of life, both of the body and of the spirit: For if all things were made through Him, then also foods are continuously produced through the same: But for spiritual life, He offered Himself as food,
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] saying: 'I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever:' And again: 'Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, ye have no life in you:' And again: 'For My flesh is meat indeed, and My blood is drink indeed.' But because we are continually washed, and fall by our iniquities, therefore He also offered Himself as a support for this ruin, making purification for sins, and bearing all our sins, as the Father had commanded,
[Marginal note: Isaias] as we read in Isaiah: 'The Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all,' and 'with His stripes we are healed.' Nor content to have purged us from all defilements, but that we might build virtues, He offered Himself as a stable foundation, which would sustain our whole edifice.
[Marginal note: Paulus] 'No man (says Paul) can lay any other foundation than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ:'
[Marginal note: Isaias] Which also Isaiah had foretold: For speaking in the person of the Redeemer and suffering Christ, he recounts many things which He suffered, saying: 'I gave My back to the smiters, and My cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not My face from shame and spitting.' And after many things recounted, turning to the ignorant and blinded people, he says: 'Who walks in darkness, and has no light, let him hope in the name of the Lord, in whom alone is salvation: and let him lean upon his Lord God, who indeed saved the world in human flesh.' Nor can we lean upon any other than upon that staff which comforts and sustains all. This is what is said of the Queen of Heaven and Empress of the world: 'Leaning upon her beloved Son.'

Why are not all sustained by Him.                                         Chapter X.
[Decorative initial E] ND if Christ, together with the Father, is involved in the production, preservation, and provision of all things, and was given for the redemption of all,
[Marginal note: Paulus] as Paul says: 'He delivered Him up for us all:' And granted that the iniquities of us all were laid upon Him, and we are said to be saved by His stripes, nevertheless not all receive spiritual life from Christ's very life

--- Page 553 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

they receive, nor are they sustained by his support, lest they perish: Which brings no small
difficulty to us, namely whether this is because not all are predestined,
or chosen, or because life and sustenance are not granted except to those who are willing: But
that detracts from divine clemency and the authority of the sacred scripture, which says: God
[Marginal note: The same] wills all men to be saved: This, however, seems to cast aspersion on divine
election, when we say that it depends on our consent and will: But (if
I am mistaken) it proceeds from both, saving the clemency and dignity of divine election: Which
does not depend on our consent, but wills us to be cooperators in those things which pertain
to our salvation: For just as the crown of the kingdom is prepared for us from the foundation of the
world, yet no one will be crowned unless he has lawfully striven, in the same way not all
receive life from the tree or river of life existing, or flowing in the midst of paradise,
communicating to all, unless they have disposed themselves to receive that life:
[Marginal note: Apocal.] Which therefore cries out at the end of the Apocalypse: Let him who thirsts come: and let him who wills take
the water of life freely. Nor does it only require our consent and desire from
us, but also our strenuousness: by which we may conquer in battle, as is described at the beginning of the
[Marginal note: Ibidem] same revelation: To him who overcomes I will give to eat from the tree of life, which is in the
[Marginal note: STVS DEVS.] paradise of my God. And while he lived in mortal flesh, he cried out in the temple: If anyone
thirsts, let him come to me, and drink. For it is indeed enough that he has procured life for us, and
is ready to give it, and that he has borne the iniquities of all of us, seeking our consent,
and that we ourselves be cooperators in our own business: He, therefore,
who does not wish to hear the caller, nor acquiesce to the one drawing him, nor receive the gift from the giver,
is deservedly excluded from such a great benefit: as Paul and Barnabas frankly and steadfastly said
[Marginal note: Paul Barnab.] to the Jews, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles: It was necessary to speak the word of God
to you first, but since you judged yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold, we turn to the Gentiles.
And the Lord himself in the gospel noted by [Marginal note: Matth. Lucas] Matthew and Luke, when he proposed
the parable of the wedding, dinner, or supper, added that many judged themselves unworthy of such a great feast,
despising, namely, the calling messenger, and therefore were excluded. And wherever there is talk of acquiring
the heavenly kingdom, or having Christ's suffrage and patronage, our consent is required:
[Marginal note: Augusti.] whence wisely and learnedly Augustine says in the volume entitled 'On
Ecclesiastical Dogmas': We have the beginning of our salvation through God's mercy: that we acquiesce
to the saving inspiration, this is within our power: For in every
place, province, and region, God invites each of us by the voice of the prophets, the preaching of the
Apostles, the spread gospel, the suggestion of Angels, and an inner inspiration:
[Marginal note: Paul] as Paul, discussing with the Romans, says: There is no distinction between Jew and
Greek: For the same Lord of all, rich unto all who call upon him: For everyone
whoever calls upon the name of the Lord will be saved. How then
will they call upon him in whom they have not believed? Or how will they believe in him whom they have not
heard? How will they hear without a preacher? And indeed, their sound has gone out
into all the earth, and their words to the ends of the world: The words indeed of the Apostles,

--- Page 554 ---
TONE TWO. 207

and of preachers, the words of angels speaking inwardly and offering guidance, the words of Christ and the Holy Spirit speaking inwardly and inspiring. For Christ, our support, attempts all things so that He may have our consent for receiving the grace and salvation which He Himself intends to bestow: as He says with an open voice to the chosen people, and consequently to all: "How often I have longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, and you were unwilling." For His word is for all, who desires all people to be saved.
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]

How He was exalted from the earth. Chapter XI.

[Decorative initial O] It is necessary (says God the Son Himself) for the Son of Man to be exalted, so that everyone who believes in Him may not perish, but have eternal life. Indeed, great is this mystery here, that eternal life is given in the exaltation of the Son of Man, and that He Himself is said to be exalted from the earth, like the serpent in the desert. Nor do I think this should be understood of the exaltation of the body, when, hanging on the wood, it was lifted from the earth and the mountain on which the cross was fixed. Nor do I think this is to be understood of that exaltation by which He is always exalted with the Father, sitting at His right hand: but of that exaltation which occurs in our sight, when, namely, the sublimity of His divinity is revealed to men: so that seeing Him as He is, they may venerate, exalt, and magnify Him, Just as at His death, the Centurion and those who were with him, seeing the air darkened contrary to the order of nature, the earth tremble, the rocks split, the dead rise, exclaimed, saying: "Truly this was the Son of God." Or of that exaltation, which through the cross itself Christ as man merited to be placed over every creature, as the Apostle speaks with open words, saying:
[Marginal note: Paul]
"Christ became obedient for us unto death, even death on a cross, therefore God exalted Him and gave Him a name that is above every name: so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of those in heaven, on earth, and under the earth: and every tongue confess that our Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father:"
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
Which the Savior Himself also confirms, saying: "It was necessary for Christ to suffer and so to enter into His glory:" By these words He openly demonstrates that He, insofar as He is man, acquired glory and a kingdom through the work completed in His passion and cross: But He is said to be exalted from the earth, because both the work He accomplished and the sublime and exalted kingdom He obtained were not earthly, but heavenly, sublime, and high: "My kingdom (He says) is not of this world," but it is that which the Father prepared from the foundation of the world: The possession of which He obtained for us, and for Himself the dominion, on the cross. But why the exaltation of Christ on the cross is equated with the exaltation of the serpent, which Moses erected at the Lord's command, is quite openly stated in the book of Numbers:
[Marginal note: Num.]
where it is read that when the people sinned by complaining about the food brought from heaven, God sent fiery serpents among the people: who, struck and wounded by them, came to Moses as suppliants, asking that those serpents be removed: Therefore, as Moses prayed for the people, the Lord said:

--- Page 555 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

Make a bronze serpent, and place it as a sign: whoever, having been struck, looks at it, will live: which was also done. So also those struck by any kind of sin, by which the ancient serpent and his satellites are accustomed to wound mortals, if they look at Christ hanging on the wood, where he obtained the healing and salvation of all, asking for his help, they are healed. But here lies a mystery, why God willed the serpent to be exalted, which is the image of the enemy of the human race: and why Christ is likened to it: For what does a serpent contribute to healing? What agreement between the figure of the prince of darkness and the Prince of light? What symbol of Christ with that unclean and diabolical reptile? Indeed there is no agreement or symbol here, except in the erection. But healing is conferred in a varied, indeed, entirely opposite way: For those looking at Christ are healed effectively by Him, who, as the true physician, brought healing to all of us, according to that prophetic saying: [Marginal note: David] "He sent his word, and healed them." But those looking at the serpent were healed by an occasion taken (from it), not indeed adhering to it, or demanding healing from it, but abhorring it: For seeing the figure of the serpents, which had been sent by God as punishment for sin, they, being pricked in heart, returned to God Himself, praying for health and a remedy against the bites of the serpents: Just as among us the devil is painted as horrendous and terrifying in appearance, so that the people, seeing and contemplating his deformity and cruel rage, may dread him and be hostile to him, as much as they can. We could pursue other more secret mysteries about the serpent, revealing why the instigator of all evils, in his first encounter with man, assumed the form of a serpent: and how through the same image the figurative people obtained bodily health, which was a type of the health of both man (body and soul) given by Christ, who was assimilated to the serpent himself: but let these few words suffice, since it is not permitted to speak of all things.

How, being exalted, he drew all things to himself. Chapter XII.

[Large decorative initial E] Therefore, being exalted, he deservedly drew all things, because then he put on an all-encompassing attractive power: For goodness and love attract, so much so that they unite [Marginal note: CHRI] lovers together. But what greater, what more intimate, and more intense love [Marginal note: STVS.] could be shown, than to give life and soul for the beloved? "For no one has greater love than this, than to lay down his life for his friends," said Christ himself, so that he might signify to all: how much attractive power he received, being exalted on the cross. Wisdom and eloquence also attract. Hence the wise [Marginal note: Solomon] Solomon drew that queen from the ends of the earth, and wise teachers draw disciples from everywhere to their audience. Nor do hearers gather less from all sides to an eloquent preacher. But behold, more than Solomon, and more than Demosthenes, or Cicero, is Christ our king, exalted on the cross, in whom (as [Marginal note: Paul] Paul says) are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And again: "We preach Christ crucified, indeed a stumbling block to Jews, but foolishness to Gentiles, but to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, the power of God and the wisdom of God." Which, being hidden, since not all see or know it, considering

--- Page 556 ---
TONE TWO: 208

thinking that] that work is foolishness and not wisdom, they are not attracted: Wealth and money also attract, to which all things obey, even unto death, as is clear in those who receive military stipends: To these, people flock from all sides more frequently, the greater the abundance in the one leading to military service. But our crucified one was so filled with true riches, especially on the cross, that from his fullness we all receive, and he is rich towards all who call upon him: And he cries out to everyone: "I advise you to buy, or acquire from me, refined gold, so that you may become rich:" For glory and abundant riches [Marginal note: CHRIST] are in his house. Power and victory also attract: For many supporters adhere to a victorious, great, and powerful prince; and even terrified enemies surrender. But no victory is greater, no triumph more glorious than this, which the Emperor of the Christian army reported in a duel fought on the cross against the enemy [Marginal note: CHRIST] of the human race, as he himself had predicted a little before he underwent the cross. "Now," he said, "the prince of this world will be cast out." Having conquered him, he plundered the spoils: he redeemed captives: he subdued the world, granting to all the faculty of conquering: he attracted so many thousands that there is no number of those who, imitating him, gave their lives to conquer: which they would certainly not have done, had they not been attracted by the virtue of him dying on the cross. Among attractive things is also novelty, to which both the common people and men of any gravity are drawn: But no novelty is greater than that which Christ, exalted on the cross, brought about, so that, sitting on the throne after his victory, he might say: "Behold, I make all things new," as John relates, [Marginal note: The same] as he had seen and heard in those highest and hidden inner chambers: Concerning these renewed things, we strive to speak in this new song. Also among the most attractive things are generosity and liberal distribution, especially of those things which are necessary for the needy: But Christ, hanging on that cross, forgave all our sins: and for us he paid every debt to the eternal Father: For since we were all debtors, no one excepted, he pardoned all, he forgave all, as the Apostle says: [Marginal note: Paul] "When you were dead in your transgressions, he made you alive together with him, having forgiven you all your transgressions, by canceling the record of debt that stood against you with its legal demands, nailing it to the cross." And concerning the Father's generosity, he says to the Romans: "He who did not spare his own Son, but [Marginal note: The same] delivered him up for us all, how will he not also with him graciously give us all things?" Up to this point we have spoken of the manifold power of attraction which Christ, dying on the cross, acquired for himself: which is rooted in manifold acquired virtue: But now we will proceed to speak of his own inherent attractive power, which is connatural and consubstantial to him: For all acknowledge how great the attractive force is in stones. The magnet, for all to see, attracts iron: and the ruby, and rubbed amber, attract straw, and many such things. What then shall we say of that most precious stone placed at the head of the corner, indeed rejected by men, but chosen and honored by God? as Peter says: [Marginal note: Peter] Indeed, in him is not only the virtue of the ruby, the magnet, the diamond, and all precious stones, but the virtue of all plants, metals, animals, men, angels, and even of the eternal Father himself, who gave him all things: Therefore, he deservedly attracts all, especially

--- Page 557 ---
...especially the elect, and those who wish to have a symbol with him: Which indeed we can have, if we are willing to accept his institutions and teachings, and also sacred things, and all that he taught for our expiation and purification: Or if the Eternal Father, by his boundless power, deigns to draw us to the Son, to whom the rightly purified adhere. But let us pass on to other matters.

How virtues and divine powers seemed diffused into many things. Chapter XIV.

<span style="font-size: 200%; line-height: 0.5; vertical-align: -0.2em; display: inline-block;">D</span>eity, as we have proven, operates in all members of the mundane body, enabling all to cooperate, lest the dissected parts of the world should fail without a unifying power, or so greatly oppose each other that they could not possibly stand. But the ancients, not perceiving this sacrament of unity, believed in many kinds of divine powers, multiplied according to the plurality of things, as Porphyry gathers, and after him Eusebius of Caesarea, from those things which ancient seers sang scattered and in many places: Which we will briefly touch upon.

Indeed, they called the power of the universal air Juno (because it helps mortals): But the effeminate air, the lower Juno, since nothing is softer: And the power of that lower air, which is illuminated by lunar light, they called Latona from "latendo" (hiding), because it makes souls hide and forget those things for which they were instituted, before they descended to the lunar orb: so that they appear as if blank slates having entered this lower air.

But they call the power of the earth Vesta: because it produces herbs and flowers: which are like garments and ornaments of the earth itself. And because this power is fertile, they wished to denote it in the form of a woman. But Rhea (whom the Latins called Ops) they judged to be the power of stony and mountainous land: But Ceres they called the power of fertile plains: but the female power they called Persephone: But Dionysius they called the mixed power of all plants, because herbs are always combined with both sexes: Which power the Egyptians named Isis and Osiris: There is also (as Plato says in Cratylus) Dionysius, as if "didos oinon," that is, giver of wine, and consequently of other fruits, ripening them with his fiery power, not indeed elemental, but solar:

For they called the elemental power of fire Vulcan: But the power of devouring fire they called Vesta, and this infertile: Whence the Poet [says]:
Nor do you understand Vesta to be anything other than living flame:
And you see no bodies born from flame.
Rightly, therefore, a virgin, who left no seeds.

But as Plato understands it, Vesta, whom they also call Vestia, they named the "ousia" of things, that is, their essence: because all things are clothed by her. And she is sterile, because essence neither generates nor is generated, but generates and is generated as an individual, not indeed by reason of essence, but by reason of the generative power existing in the generator: to which corresponds the passive potentiality in the generated. But let us proceed.

Therefore, in the Sun, this fiery power is called Apollo, from the movement of its rays, or by a fourfold etymology (as it pleases Plato) se-

--- Page 558 ---
VOLUME TWO. 209

-cording to the fourfold virtue dedicated to him, music, medicine, prophecy,
and skill in archery. Hence Apollo is said to be from *hemopolon*, that is, simultaneously turning
all things, and by a certain harmony leading to moderation: Or from *apolyon*,
which is washing away, and purifying: and consequently healing: which indeed
is the work of a physician: Or from *aplon*, which is simple, and straight, and belongs to prophets: who
rightly judge future things: or because prophecy is received with a simple mind, and a right heart:
Or from *aiballon*, which is a perpetual, or strong thrower. But let us proceed.
Furthermore, they judge that Atys and Adonis pertain to crops and fruits:
But Atys to flowers, which fall off before they come to fruit. Hence his
genitals are said to be cut off, because fallen flowers produce neither seeds nor fruits:
Adonis, however, looks to perfect fruits. They say Silenus is a symbol of spiritual movement:
The effective power of waters, Oceanus: But its symbol,
Tethys, that is, as it were, a gushing spring, as it pleases Plato: But the virtue of its water, [Marginal note: Plato.]
which we can drink, is called Achelous: of the sea, Neptune: But insofar
as Amphitrite generates, among the Egyptians, the Nile: Indeed, the particular [Marginal note: Aegypt.]
virtues of fresh waters are called Nymphs, and of the sea, Nereids: Returning to the sun,
some called its strength Hercules, attributing to him twelve labors
because of its course through the twelve signs. They say nine Muses assist him,
that is, the nine celestial orbs, most harmonious in motion and power: By what
reason, however, revolving, he completes the seasons of the year, he is called Chorus. They called the Moon Dia-
na, and Lucina: who assists women in childbirth from the new moon.
And what Apollo is in the sun, that Minerva is in the Moon. And again, the Moon is called Hecate
because of the various figures of her body: to whom the Fates are associated: Clotho for generating,
Lachesis for nourishing, Atropos, as it were, without turning to piety, presides over necessity,
not because the Moon alone does these things, but because it immediately pours out influences,
which it receives from higher sources, like a matrix, to be poured out. But the virtue of Saturn,
since it is cold and slow, they attributed to time, depicting him as an old man,
because all things grow old with time. They put fiery Mars in charge of war, from the impetus
which he displays in anger: Venus with her Cupid, to generation and love. The power
of speech and interpretation they called Mercury. Plato [Marginal note: Plato] pursues many things concerning the
etymology of these names, which he tries to demonstrate as congruent with the things themselves, as far
as that idiom allows: And before him Hesiod, [Marginal note: Hesiod.] where he treats of the genealogy of the gods,
and most later writers, All of which it would be long to adduce, nor do I consider them too necessary,
nor very congruent, because they are applied somewhat harshly: For Plato wished to
imitate the etymology of the first language, in which the protoplast imposed most fitting names on things.
But the congruence of names with things in the Hebrew language differs from that
which is in the Greek and Latin idiom, as much as the Hebrew language itself is more
sacred and divine than these, which follow it, though at long paces, and Latin
longer than Greek: because the latter (Greek) is immediately derived from Hebrew, but Latin from Greek.
But let us proceed. They called the symbol of the universe Pan, that is, the whole.
DD

--- Page 559 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

And this, spread into very many parts, they believed to be multiplied divine powers: Hence, for diverse needs, they implored these divine powers, which they believed to be diverse, with various prayers, many kinds of sacrifices, and incantations. For wisdom indeed they earnestly sought from Minerva, whom, born from the brain of Jove, they considered a deity favoring wisdom. To conquer in war they demanded from the deity of Victory, whom they believed to be born from Acheron and Styx, that is, from affliction and sadness: For Acheron signifies without joy, or without gladness, and Styx signifies sadness: because it is necessary for those who wish to conquer to abstain from many things and to inflict the greatest force upon themselves, whence sadness arises. But in punishing the wicked, they implored the deity of victorious Justice, whom they call Nemesis. They believed they obtained kingship from Jove, lord of all: And a happy union of marriages from Hymenaeus: But a prosperous navigation from the winds, sons of Astraeus the Titan and Aurora, as if born from the sun's heat refreshing the air, especially at dawn, when the sun begins to spread its rays over the ear- [Marginal note: Aristo.] th: Which Aristotle follows when in his Meteorology he says winds are produced from the heat of the sun: Nevertheless, they are said to have power from Juno, because they blow only in the air (which is called Juno). But whence the winds come, although the digressions of poets and philosophers are long, yet the truth is one: concerning which [Marginal note: David] the prophet says: He who brings forth the winds from his treasuries. But let us proceed. They believed they obtained graces from Venus, who is so called as if beautifying all things, [Marginal note: Cicero] or coming to all things, as it pleases Cicero. And if they hoped to receive any other benefit from the earth, sea, ether, plants, trees, heavens, and suchlike, they invoked those deities which they believed presided over them. The common people, however, whose concern is always to lean towards multitude, not content with these deities, divided them into more: For they believed in five Suns from various effects: four Vulcans: five Mercuries: four Apollos: three Aesculapiuses: three Dis: five Dionysuses: five Minervas: four Venuses: three Cupids. And wandering through many such things, even to harmful things introduced by evil angels, they not only gave names of gods, but also established sacred rites: for they publicly dedicated a temple to Fever in the Roman palace: and an altar to ill Fortu- [Marginal note: Pliny] ne in the Esquiline, as Pliny relates. And they came to such a degree of madness that they even wished to assign deities to thefts and crimes: And fashioning images of all these, they instituted sacred rites for them, despising the one God, from whom are all things. Hence they took cause for idolatry, each one composing for himself (so that I may jest with Pliny) Junos, Joves, Genii, Lares, Penates, and gods, whom they wished. Also led to extreme madness and darkness by the Prince of darkness, they did not blush to even in the underworld find gods whom they might worship, venerating the most miserable and lowest of all under three names: Whom from enriching they called Dis, and Pluto: For πλοῦτος (ploutos) in Greek, in La- tin is called rich: To whom they assigned three-headed Cerberus, as if devouring flesh: [Marginal note: Statius.] For κρέας (kreas) means flesh, and βόρος (boros) means devouring, they say: And rightly so, because he always goes about, seeking whom he may devour, sparing no one, but continually accusing, or harming: Whence the Poet (says).

--- Page 560 ---
TONVS SECVNDVS. 110

The leader of Erebus demanded the crimes of life from the people,
Having no pity for men, angry at all shades:
Furies stand around, and the varied beginnings of death:
And cruel punishment wields many-sounding chains.

To him they also assigned a three-pronged scepter, and a chariot of three wheels, which three horses drew, and the dog Cerberus. Others also depicted him as three-headed: And all these things, because he presides over the three sources of crimes: avarice, pride, and luxury: Which is not alien from sacred scripture: For sacred scripture calls him Amon mino in Jeremiah, but in the Gospel Mammon, inasmuch as he presides over riches: [Marginal note: Ierem. Matth.] But Azazel in Leviticus, where we have the scapegoat; but in Tobit Asmodeus: [Marginal note: Leuiti. Thobi.] According to which three names, he has a threefold power in the world, concerning which John says: [Marginal note: Ioan.] "All that is in the world is either the lust of the flesh, or the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life." And those skilled in secular literature beautifully describe him as placed in the depths of Tartarus, in a house indeed dark, and always with livid shadows, and opaque with dreadful gloom; whence he is called the prince of darkness, but also the prince of the world, because he is the instigator of evil desires which flourish in this world: For he dwells in the depths, that is, in the most filthy things over which he rules: For what is gold, what is this lowest silver, but the dregs of the earth? What is the lust of the flesh, but a certain heat and boiling of earthly flesh? And what is ambition, but the appetite for this filthy portion? To this calamity, therefore, mortals have come, that submerged in this most miserable dregs, they would adore the lord of the dregs itself: To which calamity almost all mortals have come, especially the Romans, lords of the world; with whom, as the chief authors of this crime, Paul, speaking, says: [Marginal note: Paulus] "And they changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image resembling corruptible man, and birds, and four-footed animals, and creeping things: therefore God gave them up to the desires of their hearts, to uncleanness, to dishonor their bodies among themselves: because they exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator." And they were so agitated by pernicious spirits that they sacrificed themselves to demons, and sought to appease wicked powers with the blood of their sons. The Rhodians (as Eusebius testifies) [Marginal note: Eusebius] sacrificed a man to Saturn, not indeed to the good one, but to the evil one. Also in Salamis (which in ancient times they called Coronea), up to the time of Diomedes, a man was sacrificed to Grauala, daughter of Ceclops. Manethus, the Egyptian historian, also narrates in his book "On Piety" that men were sacrificed in Heliopolis. [Marginal note: Manet.] [Marginal note: Euseb.] And Eusebius recounts many such things, and with him Dionysius Halicarnassus and Diodorus Siculus; [Marginal note: Diony. Diodo.] but let these suffice from many to indicate the most miserable calamity of men before the coming of the Redeemer.

DD ij

--- Page 561 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**
Christ, freeing the human race from this calamity, cast down that three-
headed beast. Chapter 14.

[Decorative initial Q] Pitying therefore such great error, wickedness, and unhappiness, the eternal Father
sent down His son Christ Jesus, who rescued us from the
power of darkness: and transferred us into the kingdom of the Son of His love.
He therefore, having undertaken the battle against the instigator of all evil,
conquered him: and having taken away his power, bound him in Tartarean prisons, having
[Marginal note: Apocal.] (as it is said in the Apocalypse) the keys of the abyss, and of hell. And by His command, an angel
descending from heaven bound with a great chain (as it is said in the same place) the great serpent,
[Marginal note: CHRISTUS] who is the devil: whom, exalted on the cross, He had already conquered, as He had promised,
saying: "Now the prince of this world will be cast out." Rejoicing for this, Paul with
[Marginal note: Paulus] the Corinthians says: "Death is swallowed up in victory." For death itself is the angel of
death, and the prince of darkness, as all who think rightly explain. It follows: "O death,
where is thy victory? O death, where is..."

--- Page 562 ---
**VOLUME TWO. 211**

and rescued the captive prey from his hands: With him overthrown, he easily demolished all things which he had contrived by his cunning and wickedness, to turn man away from the worship of God.

How he called all other divine powers to himself. Chapter XV.

[Decorative initial V] ERILY, in order to remove idolatry and the worship of many divine powers from mortals, he called to himself the entire divine power, diffused into many (as the Father commanded): Which sacrament, indeed, revealing to those who understand, he said: "All things have been delivered to me by my Father," that is, the powers of all, the virtues of all, the divine powers of all, as Paul admonishes us with a clear voice, saying: "Having despoiled principalities and powers, he openly triumphed in himself," confidently transferring all the power of others to himself: And again: "He emptied every principality, and power, and virtue," so that we no longer seek necessary and opportune things from others, but from him to whom the Father has given all things. Hence he taught all, that henceforth they should ask the Father in his name: "Whatever (he said) you ask the Father in my name, he will give you." And this is the principality which (as the oracle of Isaiah attests) was placed upon his shoulders: which used to be upon the shoulders of various princes: but with them despoiled, all things were gathered into him: whom the Most High commanded to appear in visible flesh, so that the eyes of common people, who cannot behold spiritual things, nor are able to contemplate them, might have a figure offered to them, which they might behold: and in it adore the divine power and divinity: which lowly minds could not imagine.
Therefore, whoever desires true wisdom, not imagined Minerva, let him invoke Christ, the wisdom of God. Whoever desires life and health, let him not indeed implore Apollo or Aesculapius, but him who is the true life, and the physician healing all infirmities: concerning whom the Royal prophet sings: "He sent his word, and healed them." Whoever desires a prosperous journey on land and sea, let him not pray to Aeolus or the Astraei, but to him who commands the sea and winds: and they obey. Whoever desires an abundance of fruits or wine, let him no longer entreat Ceres or Bacchus, but him who immediately multiplied five loaves and satisfied a copious crowd of men and women, and by his sole command turned water into wine: who also said: "I am the true vine," providing indeed better wine than Bacchus or Dionysius. If indeed anyone needs water, let him not approach Oceanus, Achelous, the Nereids, Cymothoe, or Amphitrite, but let him fly to that most abundant fountain of life, from which water flows: which whoever drinks, will not thirst again. If anyone, however, wishes to delight in flowers, fruits, and vegetables, let him no longer invoke Attis or Adonis, but that true twin tree of life, which provides divine and human fruits: or feeds with bark and pith, so that we may find pasture in it everywhere. And if anyone desires riches, let him no longer approach Pluto, the lord of the earth, who holds riches with him, but the Prince of true treasures, which are preserved in the heavens: who also knows how to reward a hundredfold those who renounce having a share with Mammon: With which hundreds and thousands of monies given by God, and not by Mammon, li-
DD iij
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
[Marginal note: Isaias]
[Marginal note: Dauid]
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]

--- Page 563 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...we will be able to use quickly, just as Abraham, David, and other friends of God did, who abounded in riches. But if anyone desires the best union of marriage, let him no longer seek Hymen, the devised deity of union and love, but let him approach Him who joined those things which were considered unconnected, namely the divine and human nature: Who also invites all of us to the wedding, not as strangers or servants, but as true brides: And who first unites these carnal marriages in heaven, before the spouses are joined on earth. And if anyone desires delights, let him no longer seek them from Venus and Cupid, but from Him who planted the garden of delights from the beginning: in whose right hand are everlasting delights: and who gives drink from the torrent of His pleasure to all who approach Him. Finally, if anyone seeks a kingdom and pre-eminence, let him no longer humbly ask Jupiter, nor seek it by Martian favor, war, and arms, but let him approach Him who said: "I dispose a kingdom for you, just as the Father disposed for me:" [Marginal note: CHRIST] And who promised to say: "Come, blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." But what more? Let us say [Marginal note: Paul] with the Apostle: "Rich unto all who call upon Him:" so much so that hereafter no other deity is to be resorted to, except the Father: to whom we enter through the Son, as through a door: and we are led by the Holy Spirit, according to that prophetic [Marginal note: David] word: "Your good Spirit will lead me into a level land." Who nevertheless are three in one in deity and divine power: from whom alone are to be sought things necessary and opportune, and not from diverse deities: To the worship of this one God He Himself had first led the Israelite family, but now the whole human race, even though the Hebrews do not admit that the Messiah has come, and the Ishmaelites follow Mahometan heresies, nevertheless all adore one God: Which we do not doubt has been done by the power of Christ exalted on the cross. But why He permits the Hebrews to remain longer in their obstinacy, and the Ishmaelites in that error, is to be discussed elsewhere.

This dominion obtained, and the attraction of all deities to Himself, is proven by evident fact. Cap. XVI.

[Decorative initial E] And lest we seem to assert only with words what we are striving for, we will also review some most manifest effects that prove this: For Christ having died on the cross, on which He brought back triumph over the enemy, so that the powers of darkness were cast down: so much so that those [powers] which at first procured worship, giving responses from idols and temples as divine oracles, immediately fell silent, all power having been taken from them, not only of ruling, but also of speaking to mortals under the guise of Gods and disposers of this world: Which we not only see with our own eyes, but (what is wonderful) their chief worshippers themselves admit, marveling: For Porphyry [Marginal note: Porphy.] in his book 'On the Failing Oracles', compelled by truth, sings these words:

The voice of the Pythian has been taken away, not to be recalled by anyone
For long ages, for now Apollo ceases,
He is silent, with keys locked, therefore with rites duly performed

--- Page 564 ---
TOMVS SECVNDVS. 212

Depart from your homeland, and return to the sacred thresholds.
And Plutarch in the title of the same book: When (he says) I was speaking to Cleombrotus [Marginal note: Plutarc:] "Tell me, O friend, if it pleases you, why the oracles, about which you spoke so much, have been extinguished," with him being silent out of shame, "What is it necessary (says Demetrius) [Marginal note: Demett.] to ask about them, when we see that almost all of them here, except one, have failed." But also in Boeotia, places called 'many-voiced' because of the multitude of oracles, all have dried up like streams of water. Indeed, Plutarch says even more, [Marginal note: Plutarc:] that a voice was heard from the Echinades islands at the time of Christ's suffering, that their great Pan was dead, his power having evidently been extinguished, both in ruling and in responding, although an oracle is brought forward in confirmation that demons die. This voice, spread by widespread fame, was even divulged to Emperor Tiberius, who, having examined witnesses, placed the deposition in the royal archives. Therefore, the most celebrated Delphic oracle ceased: and the Pythian, and all others, ceased. But also, a little after the death of the vanquisher of demons, all temples of Apollo, Jupiter, Juno, Minerva, Diana, and whatever false gods there were, were destroyed, and temples of Christ were erected, and in honor of those who followed Him: so that we can exclaim:
Behold, our God CHRIST reigns through the ages:
And all created things offer prayers to the Creator.

And what Porphyry, that rabid dog against us, says in that book, which he published against our reli- [Marginal note: Porphy:] gion, let us hear: "Nor should we wonder (he says) if for many years now the city has been afflicted by plague, since Aesculapius and other gods are far from it: For since Jesus is worshipped, we can obtain no benefit from the gods." Indeed, wonderful is the power of truth, that the spear, which the fiercest enemy directs against us, turned by the force of truth against the one who directed it, strikes him who sent it. If the gods yielded to Jesus, O Porphyry, do you not unwillingly confess Jesus to be stronger than your gods? If you say: "They departed in indignation": Why (I ask) do they not suppress him who occupies their dignity, and his worshippers? "They punish (you will say) by afflicting with disease": But with the disease ceasing, and the worshippers of Jesus prevailing, have your gods, led by repentance, ceased from afflicting the worshippers of Jesus? For those worshipping Him, attacked by your gods and Roman princes for a long time, always received better increases, and His worship was so amplified, that the princes of the world were utterly vanquished: and the forces of the whole world yielded to a few poor messengers of the Gospel. Moreover, Aesculapiuses, and Apollos, and Plutos, and Serapises, and Minervas, and Pallases, and Venuses, and Cupids, and whatever kind of monstrous thing there is, or what were the names of idolatry, with Christ rising from the dead, collapsed as if having heard an earthquake: so that they could neither give responses, nor demand worship: nor demand human blood, nor favor auguries or any deceptions, nor obstruct the messengers of Jesus: to whom He gave power to easily subjugate and cast down those enemies, as it says in the Gospel which is titled according to Luke: "I saw Satan falling like lightning from heaven. Behold, I have given you power to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and over [Marginal note: Lucas] all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall harm you." But He also gave this power not

DD iiij

--- Page 565 ---
OF THE SECOND CANTICLE

in certain invoked names, as Magi are accustomed to do, whether in the proper name of him
who conquers, and obtains dominion over all hostile power, just as after his resur-
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] -rection, triumphing over all his enemies, he said: "But these signs shall follow those who
believe: In my name they shall cast out demons: they shall speak with new
tongues: they shall take up serpents: and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not harm them: they shall lay
hands on the sick, and they shall recover." But they, having set out, preached everywhere,
the Lord cooperating and confirming the word with accompanying signs. Which things, perpe-
trated by the Apostles, and the followers of the triumphant Jesus, are so manifest, and everywhere
[Marginal note: Paul] proven, that they do not need new proofs. Which things, seen with their own eyes by the
princes of the world, when they could not deny them, they attributed to magic arts
the works and miracles of those who were striving with all their might to destroy magic, necromancy, auguries, deceptions, and
whatever the gentiles contrived by the art of demons.
Nor is there doubt about the truth of scripture, since so many witnesses agree in diverse parts of the
world, so that it is impossible for their agreement to be false, especially since
even their adversaries confess such deeds by them. But why do we need
witnesses? We ourselves now see

--- Page 566 ---
VOLUME TWO. 213

and the assent of Jesus. Hence the Hebrews, most skilled in divine names, can accomplish nothing after Christ, just as their ancient fathers used to do. Therefore, since they cannot invoke celestial and pure deities, they resort to infernal powers and unclean demons: and to that art of necromancy, condemned by every law and every religion: as those who were considered more experienced and prominent in such matters confessed to me with their own mouth. Some, however, to cover up their incredulity and perfidy, blame their pilgrimage, in which, being far distant from the land of promise and the temple, they obtain nothing (as they say) of authority or power. But these words are mere trifles and nonsense, since Joseph in Egypt, Ezekiel in Chaldea, and Daniel all prophesied: And he [Daniel] also destroyed Dagon there: and Christ's disciples everywhere in the world completely prevailed over demons, and are proven to perform miracles everywhere.

The same things are proven by prophecies. Chapter XVII.

[An illuminated initial letter 'A' depicting a figure, possibly a saint or scholar, at a desk] As for the oracles, which preceded this matter, coming to them, we will begin with Moses, from whom we have in Leviticus, that Nadab, [Marginal note: Leviticus] and Abihu, sons of Aaron, taking their censers, put fire and incense upon them, offering strange or foreign fire before the Lord, which He had not commanded them: And fire went out from the Lord and devoured them, and they died before the Lord. This text cannot be read without wonder, unless its hidden and mysterious meaning is understood. Abraham, Moses, Aaron, and those chosen priests labored to extinguish idolatry: and to lead everyone to the worship of the Most High God: which they desired above all things. With this zeal, Abraham, when he taught the Chaldeans about the one God, was cast by them into the fire or furnace. With this zeal, Elijah obtained fire from heaven against the prophets of Baal. With this zeal, Nadab and Abihu, seized, wanted to offer with strange fire, that is, to offer sacred things for strangers: But since they arrogated to themselves the greatest work reserved only for the Messiah, and by no means committed to them, they were punished for their arrogance: Therefore, when Aaron grieved over his lost sons from a deed performed with the greatest good zeal, Moses [Marginal note: Moses] said to him: "Thus says the Lord: I will be sanctified in those who are near, or my relatives, and I will be glorified in the sight of all the people." The one near and close to God, first of all, was Christ His Son: Afterwards the Apostles: most of whom were relatives of Christ in the second degree of kinship according to the flesh: such as John, both James, Philip, Simon, and Thaddeus: But according to the spirit, all the disciples, especially the Apostles, in whom He was sanctified and glorified in the sight of every people and of the whole world: This glory those two priests wanted to claim for themselves, without the Lord commanding it, nor the time requiring it, therefore they were punished: Hearing this, Aaron was silent, yielding to reason and justice. But Isaiah, when [Marginal note: Isaiah] he had prophesied many things about the Messiah, let us see what he added about the suppression of idols: for he says: "In the last days, that is, in the final age, the mountain of the Lord will be prepared on the top of the mountains: And it will be exalted above all hills." For it is not read-

DD v.

--- Page 567 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

...read, or seen, that any mountain has recently been elevated above hills, or other mountains, to which the nations have flowed: Whence this mountain, elevated above all hills, is that one which is written in the head of the book, and made King of kings, and Lord of lords, preferred and elevated above all princes, who as hills are elevated above the peoples: And to him the nations flowed, looking up to his character, and gift, and adoring him: for then, as follows, the Lord alone was elevated, with idols utterly crushed and demolished: whence it follows: 'In that day p-

[Marginal note: Zacha.] shall cast away man the idols of his silver, and the images of his gold.' Zacharias also speaks more clearly than the sun, saying: 'In that day there shall be a fountain open to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for the washing of the sinner, and of her that is unclean:' Which fountain (as all interpret) is the Messiah: who washes away sin, and the unclean, that is, actual, and original sin. And then (says the Lord of hosts) 'I will destroy the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be remembered:' which we now prove by fact.

[Marginal note: Ezechi.] Again in Ezekiel he says against Egypt, rich in idols: 'I will destroy the images, and I will cause the idols to cease from Memphis: and a prince from the land of Egypt shall be no more:' And the Prophet continues with many things about the slaughter of the Egyptians, which Roman princes, and others, carried out. But omitting these things, let us continue concerning the idols, which first in Egypt, Memphis, Taphene, Canopus, Alexandria, Thebes, Heliopolis, and other places of Egypt itself, with the flourishing worship of the crucified one, were demolished: and the places were filled with Anchorites, Monks, and very many venerating Jesus ex-

[Marginal note: Malach.] alted from the earth. But let us see how openly Malachi, the last of the prophets, speaks of the rejection of Israel, and the calling of the Gentiles through the power of the Messiah: 'I have no pleasure in you (he says to the Israelite people), says the Lord of hosts: and I will not receive a gift from your hand: For from the rising of the sun even to the going down thereof, my name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense is offered, and a clean oblation is offered to my name: because my name is great among the Gentiles, says the Lord of hosts:' Which the prophet himself knew with such certainty, that he announced future things as if present, in the prophetic manner: For the name of the Lord was not then glorified among the Gentiles, but began to be honored when the crucified one was exalted:

[Marginal note: Isaias] To which true Messiah at last all Israelites will come, as it is said through Isaiah: 'In that day there shall be the root of Jesse, who stands for a sign of the peoples, that is, exalted on the cross: Him shall the Gentiles beseech, and his sepulchre shall be glorious:' or (as the truth of the text has it) 'his rest shall be honor:' And the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to possess the remnant of his people, whom he indeed brought back once, but will more fully bring back from various captivities, and the great dispersion,

[Marginal note: Idem] which is now everywhere on earth, as the prophet touches upon: while it follows: 'Which remnant indeed shall be left, and from Egypt, and from Phetros, and from Ethiopia, and from Elam, and from Senabar, and from Emath, and from the islands of the sea:' By which words he touches upon the three principal parts of the world, Africa, Asia, and Europe: so that from them all

[Marginal note: Idem] places may be understood, in which they are dispersed. It follows: 'And he shall lift up a sign to the natio-

--- Page 568 ---
TONVS SECVNDVS. 214

ns, and will gather the outcasts of Israel, and will collect the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. Nor can anything be said more clearly, just as it was fulfilled to the letter, with the crucified one triumphing, and the Holy Spirit sent: With which the Apostles, filled, while they spoke, there were (says Luke) Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and inhabitants in Me [Marginal note: Luca.]sopotamia, Syria, and Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia, Egypt, and Libya, Cyrene, and Roman sojourners; also Jewish Proselytes, Cretans, and Arabs, marveling, and they said: We heard them speaking in our own tongues the mighty works of God. For this happened on the first day when Christ began to be preached: But what followed from those beginnings up to our own times, our volume could by no means contain.

Moreover, this same thing is usually corroborated by many other oracles, but what has been said will suffice for the present: However, I will briefly touch upon this one thing, which was foretold by Moses, Christ, Paul, and others, that as the most monstrous crime of all, and a plague, and a most cruel abomination, it would be crushed by the crucified Jesus, who by antonomasia is called the Antichrist. For many (says John) have become antichrists, but one is the fiercest of all, [Marginal note: Ioan.] who will be exalted, not only against Christ, but (as the Apostle says) [Marginal note: Paulus] against everything that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that he sits in the temple of God, showing himself as God: Concerning whom Moses introduces Bilhan prophesying in these words [Marginal note: Moses Bilhan]
[Hebrew text: אוי מי יחיה משומאל וצים מיד כתים וענו אשור וענו עבר וגם הוא עדי אובד]
Which, translated word for word, says: Alas, who shall live from him, that is, from the face of him who is set against God? And ships from the shore of Italy, supply 'will come', and will afflict

--- Page 569 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

enemy death: which, broken in this last and supreme effort, will perish, Jesus triumphing, and drawing to Himself all things that are to be drawn, as will be said immediately. How He will finally remove all things that distract, so that He may perfectly draw all things to Himself alone. Chapter XVIII.

**M**agna indeed, from what has been said before, a great wonder arises, why we do not see this drawing of all nations, and even of the Israelite people, as the oracles seem to have foretold: For the Royal prophet says: [Marginal note: David] And all kings shall adore him, all nations shall serve him: And Isaiah: [Marginal note: Isaiah] Arise, shine, Jerusalem, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee: for behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and mist the peoples: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen in thee: and the Gentiles shall walk in thy light, and kings in the brightness of thy rising: For mist and darkness covered the peoples, when they served idols and the powers of darkness: But when the Lord rose in the land of Jerusalem, and His glory was seen, the nations began to walk in His light, and kings in the splendor of His rising, His star having been seen in the East. There are also innumerable other oracles, by which it was foretold that all ought to be enlightened, directed, and led by this light exalted from the earth for our illumination and salvation. But this brings no small wonder to those who ponder, if this light (as has been said) has enlightened all, why do so many remain in darkness, and those who have received the mark of the most foul beast, and who, rejecting that light, are unwilling to depart from figures and enigmas? Are not also those who have only received the name, from which they are called Christians, but by their works fight against that name? For they contend among themselves with hatreds and disputes, and blaspheme God as if thrust into Tartarean prisons, they are enveloped in the allurements of the flesh, they adore idols of money, they savor earthly things, they hate spiritual things, they serve gluttony, they despise the worship of God, so much so that they seem not drawn, but utterly expelled from that light: Whence it might be judged that both the oracles of the prophets and the sentence of the Supreme Truth could be accused of falsehood: because neither do the nations flow together to Him, nor do all peoples adore Him, nor are all things seen to be drawn by Him: Satisfying these (concerns), we say that Christ worked salvation for all, delivered for the healing of all wounds, and risen and kindled as the true Sun into the light of all: Yet not all receive salvation, even those for whom salvation is prepared, until their time comes: For the Sun, in its primal creation, was filled with that light which is most sufficient for illuminating all parts of the world; yet it does not illuminate all parts simultaneously, but when its circuit is complete, no part remains deprived of the benefit of its light, and all things receive light in their own time. Christ, the Sun of justice, also rose with perfect light, by which He could illuminate every person: But there are darknesses which cannot comprehend it, either never or for a time: And those who will never wish to receive it, as enemies of light, will be given into the worst lot with the prince of darkness: But those who immediately, or at least sometime, it

--- Page 570 ---
**TONE TWO.**
**215**

have received it, these will also enjoy its benefit in the homeland of light. For the power of Christ, distributed into all members of the mystical and Christian body, is diffused like leaven into the whole mass, and like fire into many logs. But just as that whole mass is leavened with time, and the heated logs are kindled in their own time and transformed into fire, so also this mass of the human race, having received the power of Christ, will be entirely leavened with good leaven in its own time; and, heated by that divine fire, will be transformed into it, except for that part which, like dregs and parchment, will be cast into Tartarean latrines. But this will be when the course is completed, which the Eternal Father decreed for the purification of the mass to be transformed into Him. Concerning this, Sophonias says: "Wait for me, says the Lord, on the day when I rise up; for my judgment, that is, the decree given to me, is that I gather the nations and collect the kingdoms, and pour out upon them my indignation, all the wrath of my fury, for in the fire of my zeal all the earth will be devoured," that is, everyone who savors earthly things and lives according to the flesh and blood. "And I will purge all dross, both in works and in words; and then all will be pure, both in works and in words." [Marginal note: Sopho] From which it follows: "Then I will pour upon the peoples a pure lip, so that all may invoke the name of the Lord," that is, with that holiness and purity with which they ought to invoke it. And this as regards words. But concerning works it follows: "And they will serve Him with one shoulder," that is, with one heart, one worship, and conforming works. Which we have by no means seen yet. But we hope to see and rejoice when, the nations having been gathered and the kingdoms collected, fury, zeal, and holy indignation will be poured out, cleansing and purging all impurities, and gathering all dispersed things, and rendering a single lip, and that pure and clean. Which (say the Hebrews) will be that by which the law and oracles were given, and famous hymns dictated. [Marginal note: Hebræi:] Or let it be pure and clear speech, not according to idiom, but proceeding from a pure and single heart in all things out of binding charity. And then men will be led back from the multiplicity of rites and ceremonies, in which they are often confused, to a single worship; which will then be clearly unfolded according to God's good pleasure, with all discord and dissension ceasing. Whether these proceed from souls naturally disagreeing, or from bodies composed of contrary qualities, or from multiform shapes, or are fostered by varied worship, multiple influences, and diverse nourishments, indeed, a very deep investigation would be required to discern. Indeed, in man there are contrary qualities most diversely mixed, whence diverse temperaments. Various influences also intervene, disposing our bodies most diversely. There are also diverse regions, varied foods, multiple interactions, from all of which (as it pleases Ptolemy) man is led to diverse effects. [Marginal note: Ptole:] Nor does this proceed less from souls, which, if they proceed from the same source, yet passing through diverse media (as the Pythagoreans and Academics assert), [Marginal note: Pythag. Academ.] take on diverse natures and inclinations; whence dissension arises. But since that which is supremely one, from which all multitude emanates, intends to lead back, by the due course of things, all multitude into itself, the one, it is necessary that it gather...

--- Page 571 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

by gathering the multitude, it cuts off and removes all things that distract from unity.
Hence (which is marvelous to say), it will finally remove even the intelligences from those whom they protect.
[Marginal note: Isaiah] Which I would not dare to say, unless Isaiah taught me with open speech, saying concerning the manifold host presiding over Edom and Bozrah: "And all the host of heaven will waste away, and they will be rolled up like a scroll, in which many sheets are gathered and folded."
And he further adds this: "And all their host will fall away, as a leaf falls from the vine and from the fig tree, for my sword has been made drunk in heaven." This is not understood concerning the host of blessed intelligences, nor concerning the primal expulsion of the prince of darkness, because it speaks of the host of Edom and Bozrah, which then did not exist, and the discourse is of the future, not of the past. So also before he speaks most clearly,
[Marginal note: The same] saying: "The Lord has visited the host of heaven on high, and all the kings who are on earth," perhaps taking away from men and kingdoms (as some believe) all particular protection, so that He, the unique ruler, may lead those whom He rules to a complete unity of heart, love, worship, and language, with better fruit than angelic princes, even if they are good.
[Marginal note: Moses.] Hence Moses, not content with angelic leadership, wished to have God Himself as leader. "He will reduce (he says) many languages to one," which are as many as the celestial princes distributed through portions of the signs, as more secret theologians teach. For there are six for each of that celestial dodecad, who, when counted together, are found to be seventy-two, as many as were the wise men in the Sanhedrin council judging the crowd, and as many as were chosen after the twelve Apostles as teachers and leaders of the nations, not without great mystery, so that the Republic of the ancient fathers and the Christian one might hold a likeness of the celestial Republic.
And when the Prince deigns to have immediate protection over us, then perhaps the nations
[Marginal note: John] will come to that millennium, about which John says in the Apocalypse: "And they will live and reign with Christ for a thousand years, and all will be made priests of God and of Christ." And again: "And they themselves will be His people, and God Himself will be with them, their God, in the seventh sabbatical millennium, and of rest." In which God will rest from the works which He performs with us,
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] and He will rest in us, and we in Him, according to that which He said: "He who abides in me, and I in him." But much more happily shall we be in one another, and united by perfect love and rest in that homeland, where perpetual dwelling and rest will be given.

That finally He will draw all who are to be drawn. Chapter XIX.

[Marginal note: The same] Therefore, all impediments having been removed, and protection established, He will finally lead all who are to be drawn to Himself, without any resistance or error, according to that which He says: "I give eternal life to my sheep, and no one will snatch them out of my hands." And again: "All whom you have given me, I have not lost any of them." And furthermore: "All whom you have given me, I have guarded, and no one of them perished, except the son of perdition, so that the scripture might be fulfilled, which had foretold many things about the betrayer." For just as God chose, so He found a way and a path by which He might lead them to Himself, as Paul teaches us with the Romans.

--- Page 572 ---
**SECOND TONE.** [Page number:] 216

differing by hands: Those whom he foreknew, and predestined to be made conformable to the image of his Son, these he also called: and those whom he called, these he also justified: but those whom he justified, those he also magnified: what then shall we say? If God is for us, indeed drawing and leading, who is against us, distracting and leading astray? as if to say, no one.
And concerning this strongest drawing, Paul follows, saying: [Marginal note: Paulus] Who then shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or persecution, or the sword? For in all these things we overcome through him who loved us: and who draws and holds us. Therefore that wise man prayed, saying: [Marginal note: Salomon] Draw me after you; we will run. For indeed, the Eternal Father has drawn and draws with divine cords, but God made man draws with human cords, as he foretold through Hosea: [Marginal note: Osee.] I will draw them with the cords of men, with the bands of love: or in the service of love, as the truth of the letter has it. By these human cords, extended by him who was found in appearance as a man, because he drew a much greater multitude with sensible things, with domestic things, with pledges of greatest love, than he had ensnared with those invisible bonds, and not perceived

--- Page 573 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

because, I say, Jacob to the strong God: For if your people Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be converted from it: Which also Paul brings forth when discussing with the Romans. But from the very great multitude of Gentiles all are called, all are brought in, who are found wherever they are. Therefore there are few chosen from the many called Jews, to whom the word of Christ was directed: Or there are few chosen, so that they may be preferred to others: For there is a great multitude of the saved from all tongues, peoples, and nations: Whose names, even if commonly obscure, are nevertheless known and most manifest to God, and recorded in the book of life, which is always open to God. Moreover, these (people), diminishing the number of the saved in favor of what they had said, bring forth another [CHRI STVS.] word of the Savior, who says: Narrow is the gate, and strait is the way, which leads to life: and few there are who find it: Whence it seems quite manifest that few enter, or are drawn to life, in respect to the many who walk through the way of death and damnation. But let them attend, I ask, to the cautious manner of speaking of the supreme Truth, which says: And few there are who find it: For if we were to say that no one finds it, we would not depart from the truth, with [Baruc.] Baruch proclaiming: There is none who can know its way: nor who can devise its paths. And if we cannot devise (it), much less find (it), unless He shows it to us, and leads us, He who knows all things: and knew it, and delivered it to Jacob His servant, and to Israel His beloved: Afterwards appearing on earth, He taught it with His own mouth: indeed, He made Himself [CHRI STVS.] the way and the door, saying: I am the way: I am the door, through me alone is entrance given to life. He therefore alone found the way and the door, without whom we can do nothing, or devise (anything): nevertheless, many followed Him teaching, leading, and going before, and a great multitude, which no one can number. Nor do I believe that He who wills all men to be saved was of such small power, that content with the salvation of a few, He would have ceased from the care of others. Nor was the power of the leader so small [Paulus] that it might seem extinguished in the drawing of a few, with Paul saying to the Romans: If by the offense of one many died, much more did the grace of God, and the gift in the grace of one man JESUS Christ abound unto many: And again: If by the offense of one death reigned through one, much more shall they who receive abundance of grace, and of the gift, and of justice, reign in life through one Jesus Christ: Therefore, as by the offense of one unto all men to condemnation, so also by the justice of one unto all men to justification of life: And as by the disobedience of one man many were constituted sinners, so also by the obedience of one shall many be constituted just. If [CHRI STVS.] therefore many, how few? Nor does Paul speak against Christ, in whose breast Christ resonates, but with Christ, who says: I came to save, and to seek those who had perished. And who again said: All whom the Father gave me, I have not lost any of them. Therefore He saves all those given by the Father. But neither is it to be thought that the most generous giver of all good things gave few from the greatest multitude to the Son, to whom He gave all things: Nor does it befit the goodness and mercy of God that He should allow more to perish than He saves, since He can and wills to save all, except those who re-

--- Page 574 ---
**VOLUME TWO.** **217**

reject. Indeed, a time will be given (with God's favor) when the remnants, when the dispersed will be gathered, when all will serve God with one accord, and when (as Zechariah says) the Lord will be one in all, and His name one: [Marginal note: Zech.] Which will be (as it said above) on the day known to the Lord: In which waters will go forth, which are above the heavens, from the heavenly Jerusalem, that is, and half of them will go to the eastern sea: Indeed, to that east, of which Isaiah [says]: "Calling the righteous from the east:" [Marginal note: Isa.] And of which the Psalmist [says]: "He ascended above the heavens of heavens to the east:" [Marginal note: David] But the other half will go to the sea, not indeed that Syrian [sea], which forms the shores of Palestine, as some interpret: but to Christ, who in the last times was filled with that divine and super-heavenly water, so that, having become a sea, by His fullness He might irrigate all: Which water He offers with such a willing spirit, that He publicly cries out in the temple, and says: "If anyone thirsts, let him come to me, and drink." [Marginal note: CHRIST.] And these waters (as the prophet continues) will never fail, but will be in winter and summer, always refreshing souls. And then the Lord will be king over all the earth, not indeed having at that time acquired a new kingdom, because He has already become King of kings, and Lord of lords: But because all those whom He permitted to wander for a time by their own will, will have Him as Lord: Or He will be Lord of all, because the dominions and principalities of others will cease, as we said a little earlier: Which will obtain its effect either in Christ's second coming, as Jerome believes, [Marginal note: Jerome] or when He, to whom alone this day is known, has decreed it: [Marginal note: CHRIST.] Since it is not for us to know the times, or moments, which (as Christ, recalling His disciples from such inquiry, openly reserved) the Father has placed in His own power.

**EE**

--- Page 575 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

[Large initial C]Hrist is the true priest, and true bread, and host, and sacrifice, purifying all things,
and pacifying all things.                                                                                                Third Tone.

[Ornamental initial Q in a square frame depicting a figure] What a priest is, and his office.                                                              Ch. First.
That Christ was a true priest and endowed with all things that pertain to
a true priest and supreme pontiff.                                                                                                                            Ch. II.
To Christ, as the true priest, all priestly things
are due.                                                                                                                      Ch. III.
What the priest's vestments are.                                                                                      Ch. IIII.
What these vestments conferred upon priests and the chief prelate.
                                                                                                                        Ch. V.
What these figurative garments pertain to the priests of Christ.
                                                                                                                        Ch. VI.
What all those vestments with Christ, whom they especially prefigured.
                                                                                                                        Ch. VII.
Christ is a priest forever.                                                                                  Ch. VIII.
Why Christ was a priest by oath.                                                                      Ch. IX.
How Christ was a priest according to the order of Melchizedek.
                                                                                                                        Ch. X.
How much greater and better a priest Christ was than Aaron and all legal priests.
                                                                                                                        Ch. XI.
Christ was the true host, and every kind of sacrifice, and offering.
                                                                                                                        Ch. XII.
How Christ was the true lamb.                                                                          Ch. XIII.
Concerning the rod of Moses and the cross.                                                                      Ch. XIIII.
For what purpose sacrifices, and why chosen goats were commanded to be offered for sin.
                                                                                                                        Ch. XV.
Why a pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons, are commanded to be offered for the purification
of childbirth and the woman giving birth.                                                                                            Ch. XVI.
Why two birds were offered for cleansing a leper.                                                      Ch. XVII.
Why, together with a goat, a calf or an ox was offered for sin.
                                                                                                                        Ch. XVIII.
What the sheep and the lamb.                                                                           Ch. XIX.
What about the showbread, unleavened cakes, wafers, breads of fine flour, and such things
anointed with oil.                                                                                                                Ch. XX.
What the censer, or thurible, incense and incensing.                                              Ch. XXI.

--- Page 576 ---
TOMVS TERTIVS. 218
WHAT A PRIEST IS, AND HIS
office. Chapter one.

[Large decorative initial L] We enter a very wide field, and one which by its magnitude rises beyond our sight, while we wish to treat of the priest: who holds the middle ground between God and man: and is, as it were, a visible God: And especially Christ, the highest and true priest, whose priesthood we intend to explain to the best of our ability. Therefore, a priest (sacerdos) is so called, as if "giving sacred things" (sacra dans): For he administers to the people those things which he receives from the super-mundane sanctuary: Whence, how clean, how pure, how divine he ought to be, let the wise judge: For if he must administer all sacred things to us, we will presently run through seven things especially necessary for him.
First, therefore, he ought to pray for the people, as a mediator, as it is twice repeated in Le- [Marginal note: Leuiti.]
viticus, when treating of the faithless and perjured: "And the priest shall pray for him, and it shall be forgiven him:" or "he shall make atonement for him," or "he shall intercede for him for remission," as the truth of the letter sounds, which is thus written: וכפר עליו הכהן (uecaper alau ha-cohen). So also, where it treats of the purification of a woman after childbirth, it is said: "And the priest shall pray for her, and she shall be cleansed," and in whatever expiation or propitiation it is commanded by law that the priest intervene, as a mediator and obtainer of pardon and remission. So also James says: "Is anyone among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the ec- [Marginal note: Iacobus]
clesiastical church, and let them pray over him."
Secondly, he ought also to offer sacred things, as Pau- [Marginal note: Paulus]
l, discoursing with the Hebrews, admonishes us, saying: "Every high priest is appointed to offer gifts and sacrifices:" and a little before: "It is necessary for priests to offer sacrifices first for their own sins, and then for the sins of the people:" And concerning this, we are most fully taught in the law.
Thirdly, he is constituted a teacher of the people, not indeed of vain and curious doctrine, but of the law and of those things which are of God: as it is said in Haggai: [Marginal note: Aggeus]
"Ask the priest concerning the law:" And through Malachi: "The lips of the priest guard [Marginal note: Malachi]
knowledge: and they shall seek the law from his mouth:" because he is the Angel of hosts, that is, the leader of the Lord's army.
Whence, consequently, in the fourth place, he is constituted a leader of the divine army: so that he may direct and strengthen the weaker people, and be the first to sustain the attack of enemies: as we are taught in plain language in Deuteronomy: [Marginal note: Deuter.]
"If you go out (He says) the Lord to war against your enemies, and you see cavalry, and chariots, and a greater multitude of the enemy's army than you have, you shall not fear them: because the Lord your God is with you in your midst:" And this with the priest intervening: Whence it follows: "The priest shall approach the people and say to you: Let not your heart be afraid, do not yield, do not fear them, for the Lord your God goes with you, and will fight for you against your adversaries, and will save you." Which also happened in Phinehas, the most zealous priest, who, by God's command, was constituted leader of an army of twelve thousand chosen men from every tribe of Israel, against a great multitude of Midianites: concerning whom he reported a glorious [victory].
EE ij

--- Page 577 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

...from whom they brought back a glorious triumph. Any priest also ought to do this against all visible enemies or aerial powers, when the people and divine worship are in danger. And they ought to fight with zeal, prayer, and the sword of the Spirit (which is the word of God), rather than with weapons: as Samuel, Elisha, Moses, and Aaron did in the ancient law: for when the people fought against Amalek, Moses prayed for the people with uplifted hands. As his hands wavered, Aaron and Hur, who prayed with him, supported them. And as prayer prevailed, the people of God prevailed against their enemies.
[marginal note: Paul] Of whom, and others fighting thus, Paul says: "They were made strong in war, they turned to flight the armies of foreigners, they escaped the edge of the sword." And after Christ, Martin, not yet ordained but a future priest, confidently offered himself to attack the enemy formations under the very banner of Christ. Leo the First, Supreme Pontiff, pitying the people invaded by Attila, king of the Huns, approached him fearlessly, strengthened by the Spirit of God. Praying before the king, he [influenced] the most savage mind of the barbarian to...

--- Page 578 ---
TONVS TERTIVS. 219

blood, cause and cause, leprosy and non-leprosy, and you see a varied judgment within your gates, rise up, as if for a last remedy, and go up to the place which the Lord your God shall choose, and you shall come to the priests of the Levitical race, and you shall ask of them: Who will judge for you the truth of the judgment, whence you shall do whatever they tell you: And they will teach you according to the law of the Lord, and you shall follow their sentence, and you shall not turn aside to the right hand, nor to the left. However, then they were not admitted to the priesthood, except those most skilled in the law and in all judgments, but alas for unhappy times, in which often the dregs of ignorance and sewers of baseness are chosen for the priesthood, neither having a cloven hoof, nor ever eating butter and honey, so that they might know to refuse the evil and choose the good, nor ruminating even the smallest iota, nor meditating on the true sense of the law. Also in Exodus [Exodus] God makes priests and true judges so great that He calls them gods, saying: that those who harm their neighbor ought to be brought before the gods, that is, judges, who were chosen especially from among the priests, as we have already proven from the testimony of Deuteronomy. Lastly, a priest, as a good shepherd, ought to care for his sheep, administer the sacraments, watch over the flock, and lay down everything for the salvation of the entrusted people, even his life, if it were necessary: because a good shepherd gives his life for his sheep. These are the things that especially pertain to the office of a priest.

That Christ was a true priest, and endowed with all things that pertain to a true priest and supreme pontiff. Chapter II.

[C]HRIST JESUS, anointed as king, prophet, and priest above all his companions, was deservedly King of kings, Prophet of prophets, Priest of priests, or Pontiff of pontiffs. But, leaving the first two to be declared in their proper place, let us see how well he performed the office of priest. For first, he prayed for the people, not only once, but many times, and throughout the whole time of his life, now on the mountain, now in a cave, now publicly, now secretly, as is recounted by most of the evangelists in many places. Nor was Paul silent, [Paulus] but discoursing with the Hebrews, he says: In the days of his flesh, he offered up prayers with tears and strong crying, and was heard because of his reverence: And especially at the end of his life, showing how much he loved them to the end, having taken the mysterious and last supper, he prayed to the Father, saying: Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me: but now I pray for them: And again: I will ask the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter [CHRI STVS.]. And again he prayed for the whole church, as we have in the gospel, which is titled according to Luke: I, he says, have prayed for thee, Peter, that thy faith [Lucas.] fail not. But even now, triumphing in glory, he intercedes before the face of God for us, as the Apostle says. He also offered holy things to God, and the most holy of all sacrifices, namely, himself, the immaculate Lamb: Concerning which offering, when Paul had discoursed much with the Hebrews, he finally added: But this man, having offered one sacrifice for sins [Idem], forever sits at the right hand of God, of which sacrifice, once offered,
EE iij

--- Page 579 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

its efficacy ensures that we may offer a daily and perpetual sacrifice.
[Marginal note: Peter] What Peter accomplished by this offering of his, he indicates saying: "Christ died once for our sins, offering himself, namely, to the eternal Father, the just for the unjust, that he might offer us to God, indeed put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit." Moreover, he showed himself as a teacher, teaching that doctrine hidden from the wise of the world,
[Marginal note: CHRIST] which he had received from the Father of lights: "My (he said) doctrine is not mine, but of the Father who sent me." For it was such that even as a boy he would amaze those who heard him,
[Marginal note: Luke] as we have in the Gospel according to Luke, where it is said: "But all who heard him were amazed at his understanding and his answers." Indeed, this is his doctrine, than which no greater could be conceived by any intellect. Nor is it surprising, since in him were hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: Which doctrine, traveling here and there, he taught with his own mouth, preaching in the synagogues of Galilee and in the temple. Concerning which doctrine (God willing) we shall discourse in the following Tome. Against the enemy also he went forth into battle with drawn sword, who first fought in the desert for himself, afterwards obtained victory for all of us,
[Marginal note: Paul] provided only that we wish to follow it. "But thanks be to God (says Paul) who gives us the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord." For he triumphed over all the enemies of the human race, disarming principalities and powers, triumphing openly in himself. He was also a leader, ruling and guiding, as the prophecy of Micah, brought forth by Matthew, states,
[Marginal note: Matt. Micah.] in which, concerning Bethlehem, the place of Christ's birth, it says: "And you, Bethlehem, land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah; for from you shall come forth a leader who will rule my people Israel."
[Marginal note: Isaiah] And Isaiah, after acting in God's stead, had invited the thirsty to waters, and wine, and milk to be acquired freely, continues: "And I will make with you an everlasting covenant, the sure mercies of David. Behold, I have given him as a witness to the peoples, a leader and commander for the nations." By which David all interpret Christ, figured and designated in most places by the son of Jesse, and rightly so: For he (David) did not rule, nor was he a leader or teacher among the Gentiles, but only among the Israelite people. Our Christ, therefore, was given as a teacher of the Gentiles, whom he led into the worship of God, preaching to them not only with his own mouth, but also in Paul and the other Apostles and preachers:
[Marginal note: Paul] Concerning all these preaching in truth, the same Paul says: "Do you seek proof of Christ speaking in me?" Finally, the true Priest of priests, Pontiff of pontiffs, and Prince of the chief priests had such care for souls that, as a good and excellent shepherd, he would lay down his life for his sheep, forgiving sins, redeeming them not with the blood of goats or calves, but with his own blood, indeed entering for us into the holy places not made by the hand of an artisan, but exalted, penetrating the heavens, and ascending above all creatures to him who dwells in inaccessible light, the Father of the universe: to whom he presented the lost sheep, that is, human nature, carrying it on his shoulders.

--- Page 580 ---
**THIRD TONE.**
**220**

To Christ, as the true priest, all priestly duties are owed. Chapter III.

[S]acerdoti (by command of the law) were given the first fruits with all things that were offered in the sanctuary: Likewise all sacrifices, and they were commanded by the people to be honored and revered. Concerning the first, it is said in the book of Numbers to [Marginal note: Numer.] Aaron: All the first fruits which the children of Israel offer, belong to the priest: and whatever is brought into the sanctuary by anyone, and delivered into the hands of the priest, is his: But afterwards in the eighteenth chapter the Lord says: Be- [Marginal note: Ibidem] hold, I have given you the keeping of my first fruits, as if He were saying: I have delivered my first fruits to be kept, as [Marginal note: Orige.] Origen rightly understands: Which can by no means be applied to the law of the letter: because these were consumed as food, and digested (as it is said in the [Marginal note: Euange.] Gospel) went into the latrine: Hence it must necessarily be referred to the law of the spirit, according to which the first fruits can be preserved: Those indeed, of which the Apostle says to the Romans: But we, having the first fruits of the Spirit: Which can be understood in two ways: Either the first fruits which the Holy Spirit gave to the Apostles in the primitive church, namely, manifold gifts and charisms: Or by these first fruits [Marginal note: Paulus] we understand the good beginnings of our works, or good inspirations: and these we ought to preserve, and offer them to Christ, the great priest, to be preserved by His grace, and to be increased by His merits, so that He may present them most pleasing to the Father. These, moreover, are said to be offered only by the sanctified of Israel, that is, by those who, having become princes of God, begin to fight against the enemy, against whom our JESUS, the High Priest, also fought, and by those who have been initiated and consecrated to God through baptism and other sacraments. The first fruits of our works, moreover, are the beginnings of love and charity: by which we embrace God and our neighbor: Indeed, among the fruits of the Spirit, charity is placed first by [Marginal note: Idem] Paul: Which our greatest High Priest also seeks above all other things, as true first fruits and tithes, concluding in it, as in the primary foundation, and without which all other precepts, and the whole law, and the prophets are without adornment, commanding by a special precept that it be observed with all diligence, saying: This I command [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] you, that you love one another: And again: By this shall all men know that you are my disciples, and sheep entrusted to me, the good High Priest, if you have love for one another. But so that all works may be done in charity, and be pleasing to God, their beginnings must be consecrated to Christ, as [Marginal note: Paulus] Paul teaches us in Colossians: Do all things (he says) that you do in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, we ought to present the first fruits, and all things that are brought into the sanctuary, to this supreme Pontiff: so that He Himself, sprinkled with His blood, and seasoned with His merits, may present them pleasing to the eternal Father with an everlasting presentation. And this is what is said: These were for the priestly office, by an everlasting statute. But since such things have failed in the priesthood of the law, lest the scripture be dissolved, it is necessary that they be fulfilled in our true priest Christ, into whom, and into his successors, namely presbyters or priests, all the priesthood of the law has been transferred: Also owed to this High Priest are not only the first fruits, which
**EE iiij**

--- Page 581 ---
CANTICLE TWO

The Hebrews call it תרומה *terumah*, but *terumah* of *terumah*, that is, the firstfruits of firstfruits:
Which were chosen thus: The people offered ten out of a hundred to the [Marginal note: Num.] priests:
But the priests offered one out of ten to God, as we read in the book of Numbers.
Therefore, to God, who is most simple, one was given; to the people, as material, a hundred:
But to the priest, who holds the middle ground between God and the people, ten: which is
the end of numbers, and the beginning of tens, and the middle between one and a hundred.
But to Christ, our High Priest, are owed one and ten: Ten indeed
as to a human priest, but one as to God: For he is mediator,
and the end that brings rest and refreshment. Moreover, to our Priest are owed not
only the firstfruits of virtues, but also of men. And these were the first innocents killed for him,
of whom John says: 'These were bought from among all, firstfruits to God and to the Lamb.' Nor
from this does he reject others, provided they wish to offer him firstfruits and tithes, that
is, the beginnings and completions of their works: Whence he says: 'He who perseveres to
the end will be saved:' For perseverance is the offering of true tithes.
He also seeks the firstfruits of days: For in the old law, God was content
that the last of the days and the seventh in the week should be sanctified: But to Christ,
together with God the Father, we give the first, which, because it is consecrated to the Lord,
is called the Lord's Day (Sunday): On which he also gave a beginning to the world,
and at the same time to spiritual life, Christ himself rising on that day, so that in it he might give a beginning to blessed life, just as in
it he began his creation. Hence some say that this will be the last day, on which
God will close the state of our pilgrimage, as if in a perfect octave derived
[Marginal note: David] from many octonary cycles: For this eighth (octave), David celebrated several hymns,
as is clear from their titles. To the priest also are owed sacrifices, just as
[Marginal note: Lev.] we are taught from the book of Leviticus, where it is said: 'As for sin, so also for fault, or
for transgression, as our translation has it, the sacrifice belongs to the priest:' For the text
here mentions two sacrifices: One is for the sin of commission, namely, where there is
some voluntary fault: The other is for transgression, that is, the sin of omission, as
[Marginal note: Origen] Origen understands. But if the truth of the letter is well weighed, it is for a fault committed through error.
Which sacrifice the Hebrews call אשם *asham*, as is clear in the fifth chapter of the same Levi-
ticus, where it is said: אשר שגג והוא לא ידע ונסלח לו אשם הוא אשם אשם ליהוה
which, interpreted word for word, says: 'Because he erred, and he himself did not know, and
it will be propitiated, or he will be spared, he himself will offer a guilt offering as a guilt offering to the Lord,'
that is, as a sacrifice for a fault committed through error. Such and other sacrifices belonged to the
priest, so that by receiving them upon himself, he might also receive the transgression, and the sin, and any
fault for which they were offered: and intercede with God for those
offering them: In whom the High Priest Christ was profoundly prefigured:
in whom the Father placed, and he himself received, the iniquities of all of us: and
having become himself the Lamb, and [Marginal note: Paul] the true sacrifice, he bore the sins of the whole world, just as the Apostle says to the Hebrews:
'Christ was offered once to take away the sins of many:' And again: 'We have been
sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all:' And again with the Ephe-

--- Page 582 ---
**THIRD TONE. 221**

Paul [marginal note: Paulus] says: "Christ loved us, and gave himself up for us, an offering and sacrifice to God as a fragrant aroma." And in many places we have (accounts) of the offering made by Christ, the true High Priest, for us, so much so that we no longer need to offer animals, or other sacrifices, than ourselves in recognition of so great a benefit, and that, offered to the true priest, he may sanctify, purify, and present us to the eternal Father. And concerning the first offering, the Apostle, speaking with the Hebrews, says: [marginal note: Idem] "Through the Spirit let us always offer a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of lips confessing His name: for with such sacrifices God is pleased." Concerning which also in the Psalmist [marginal note: Dauid] God says: "A sacrifice of praise will honor me." And this both in confession and praise of His name, as well as in thanksgiving. But concerning the second offering, the same Apostle, teaching us in Romans, says: [marginal note: Paulus] "I urge you therefore, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and pleasing to God, which is your spiritual worship." If we also wish to descend to particulars, in Leviticus [marginal note: Leuitic.] we read that the breast of the peace offerings and its right shoulder were given to the priest: In the breast is the heart: and the shoulder in Hebrew is called שוק (shoq) which among us signifies the arm, and concupiscence. Therefore, the heart which resides in the breast, and the arm in which is concupiscence and appetite, are given to the priest for judging and purifying. Hence also we expose to the priest in confession our thoughts and affections, and all those evils which (as Christ [marginal note: CHRISTVS.] says) proceed from the heart, and become evil desires: so that he may judge them, and by absolution and penance imposed, cleanse and purify them. And it is indeed very profitable that everyone should have their heart and affection in the hand of a good and wise priest, by whom they may always be cleansed and directed towards good: For (as we said above) the judgment of difficult cases, and discerning between leprosy and leprosy, and cleansing it (which is most difficult) belongs to the priest: who can by no means judge the cause of the heart, unless we present it open to him. And because the priest holds the place of God on earth, judging hidden things and those which pertain to divine judgment, therefore by divine precept honor is also due to him, as it is said in Deuteronomy: [marginal note: Deuter.] "Whoever acts presumptuously and will not obey the command of the priest, who at that time ministers to the Lord your God, that person shall die by the decree of the judge, and you shall purge the evil from Israel, and all the people will hear and fear, so that no one will again swell with pride:" Which, in summary, I say again, that God commands that the priest, as His minister, be held in such reverence by the people, that whoever despises him shall die: To which that of the Royal Prophet [marginal note: Dauid] assents: "Do not touch my anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm:" And this, because whatever the priest does on earth, performing his priestly office, he does it acting in the place of God: as Christ clearly declares, saying: "Whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven: and whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven." Moreover, there is in the priest either a certain character (as our Theologians [marginal note: Theolo.] say) or a certain divine power, or an impressed awe, which others should fear, just as in princes and kings...
EE v:

--- Page 583 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

To divine individuals there is a certain quality, which the people, in their fear, revere. There is also, or ought to be, in the priest a certain mark of virtue, and consequently divine favor, so that all should revere him. Hence Alexander (as Origen relates in *Contra Celsum*), while waging war against Darius, revered the great Hebrew priest of God, as he had been taught by a nocturnal oracle. Emperor Theodosius revered Ambrose even when he was rebuking him. Attila (as we have said) was terrified by Pope Leo. But it would be too long to adduce all that we find written about these and similar matters. But we must lament the calamity of these times, in which (I speak with shame and indignation) priests have so debased themselves by mixing with vile and wicked individuals, serving not heavenly but earthly things, that they are now a laughingstock to God, angels, and men. But to Christ, the true and greatest priest, distinguished not with a common priestly character, but with that of the supreme pontificate and empire, shining above all in doctrine, wisdom, and holiness, is due honor and glory above all others: Whence not only in His name every knee of those in heaven, on earth, and under the earth bows, but even insensible things revere Him, and all things tremble at His nod: For He commands the sea and the winds, and they obey Him: He blesses bread, and it is immediately multiplied in a wondrous measure: He commands jars to be filled with water, and wine is made: He calls forth souls from the underworld, and they are reunited with bodies: He commands fevers, and they cease to trouble: And to conclude briefly, all things revere Him: all things obey Him: indeed, He has even given us power over all the strength of the enemy, provided we are willing to follow His footsteps, and become priests consecrating ourselves to God as a sweet aroma.

What the Vestments of the Priest are. Chapter IIII.

--- Page 584 ---
**TONE THREE.**
**222**

tightness, the linen tunic was drawn tight between the navel and the chest. The fourth kind of vestment is a round cap, like half a sphere, which the Greeks and our people call τιάραν (tiara), and others a galerus, but the Hebrews מצנפת (miznephet): Nor does it have a point at the top, nor does it cover the whole head, leaving a third part uncovered at the front: and it is bound at the back of the head with a band, so that it may not easily slip from the head: and it is of fine linen, so skillfully covered with a fine cloth, that no traces of a needle appear.

Of the remaining garments, however, which properly belong to the pontiffs, the first is ὑποδύμαβις (hypodumabis), that is, an ankle-length tunic, entirely hyacinth-colored on the sides, having sleeves sewn of the same color, and open at the upper part where it is put on the neck: which is commonly called a caputium (collar), with very strong borders woven into itself, so that they may not easily break off: However, towards the feet, on the hem, there are seventy-two bells, and as many pomegranates, succeeding each other alternately, so that his sound might be heard when he entered the temple, lest he die.

The sixth is אפוד (ephod), which the Septuagint calls ἐπωμίδα (epomida), that is, a shoulder-garment: Aquila calls it ἐπένδυμα (ependyma): But Jerome [Hiero.] calls it by its own name, ephod: which is twofold: one for priests, and this is a simple linen one, which Samuel the Levite and priest used: King David [Dauid] also used it when he wanted to consult the Lord, whether he should pursue the robbers who had attacked Ziklag and plundered it: for then he said to Abiathar the priest: 'Bring me the ephod': clothed with which, he consulted the Lord, and received a clear answer: The other ephod is woven from the four colors often repeated in the law: hyacinth, fine linen, scarlet, and purple, interwoven with gold, with a weft of hyacinth, scarlet, and purple, and with a warp of fine linen, having wondrous beauty, with twin stones enclosed and set in gold on each shoulder, which in Hebrew are called שהם (soham): which the Septuagint [Septua. Ioseph. Aquila. Symma. Theod.] translated as 'smaragdus' (emerald), Josephus as 'Sardonyx', but Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion as 'onychus', and rightly so, as we shall explain in its proper place: and on each of them were engraved the names of six Patriarchs: on the right shoulder the elder sons of Jacob, and on the left the younger ones were inscribed.

The seventh vestment is small in size, but more renowned than all the aforesaid: which in Hebrew is called חושן (hoshen), in Greek λόγιον (logion). From this, it is translated into Latin as 'rationale' (breastplate): Indeed, a short cloth woven from the four aforementioned colors, having the size of a span square, and doubled so that it might not easily tear: And it had four rows, or lines, in each of which were three precious stones: In the first, sardius, topaz, and emerald: In the second, carbuncle, sapphire, and jasper: In the third, lyncurium, agate, and amethyst: In the fourth, chrysolite, onyx, and beryl: In which were engraved the twelve names of the twelve sons of Israel. On the four belts of this breastplate were four golden rings corresponding to the four rings that were on the shoulder-garment, coupled with hyacinth bands and golden chains: so that the fastening might be firm, and it might appear as one texture. There was also (which is most important) in the breastplate of judgment itself, placed by God's command, האורים והתומים (haurim ve tumim), which we have translated as 'doctrine and truth'. And

--- Page 585 ---
CANTICLE TWO

these were upon Aaron's heart, for which we have "upon Aaron's breast": when
he entered the temple before the Lord, so that Aaron might bear the judgment of the children of
Israel upon his heart: when he entered before the Lord always. The eighth
ornament was a certain golden plate, which in Hebrew is called ציץ זהב
*zahab*, on which was inscribed the great four-letter name of God, יהוה. And this
was upon the linen cap common to all priests. But for the High Priest, it was bound
on his forehead with a hyacinthine ribbon: And by all these, the head of the priest
was crowned and protected with a wonderful visible beauty, and an intrinsic, virtual, and
divine beauty, which, according to the [Platonists], is a participation in divine beauty. These things have been ex-
[Marginal note: Platon.] cerpted from many [writings] concerning priestly vestments: But let us see what they signify.

What these vestments conferred upon the priests, and upon the High Priest. Chapter V.

[Marginal note: Hieron.] [Large decorative initial Q containing a figure] Wishing to discuss by what mystery or what figure these garments were commanded
to be made by the Most High God, we will not despise those things which the
Hebrew doctors set forth for declaring the mystical sense: Whom even [Jerome]
did not blush to imitate, as being most skilled in this matter: Afterwards, with the veil removed, and illuminated by divine light, we will declare in a mystical sense
what they represent in our priests, and what in our High Priest Christ,
[Marginal note: Sap. He.] to whom all things tend. Therefore, the [Hebrew Sages] say that the
four colors refer to the four elements, from which all things consist.
Fine linen, which is produced from the earth, is assigned to the earth: Purple to the sea, which is dyed from its
shells: Hyacinth to the air, because of the similarity of its color: Scarlet, as if burning,
to fire and the ether. For they judged it fitting that the High Priest should give
thanks to the supreme craftsman, to Him who produced both the elements themselves
and whatever was fashioned from them: and should represent the elements themselves,
and consequently all things made from the elements, to their maker. Therefore, the first garment,
with which the private parts were covered, was linen, signifying the earth from which we are drawn,
and from which our genitals must be covered: because from there we feel pleasure, to which a priest
should in no way condescend: nor should he do anything with those members, except insofar as
necessity, which we derive from the earth, compels. But gradually raised from earthly things
to heavenly ones, from head to heel they were covered with a hyacinthine garment:
which indicates the air diffused from the heavens to the earth: To which were appended
bells and pomegranates. Whose sound suppressed the thunder and lightning that occur
in the air, or by their sound terrified the aerial powers: Or (to speak more accurately)
they represented the harmony and consonance of the elements, and of all things compacted from them.
Which also the composition and wonderful order of the pomegranates signifies.
Ascending higher, they also say that through those seventy-two bells and as many
pomegranates, they also summoned the seventy-two princes of languages, six for each
of the signs, with all those entrusted to them, so that they might be present at the sacrifice which was being made

--- Page 586 ---
TOMVS TERTIVS. 223

by the Supreme Pontiff, Lord of the universe. But if this opinion of theirs is true, that summoning was figurative, sounding through bells as a kind of prelude, to indicate those things which were accomplished at the coming of the true Supreme Pontiff: as we will immediately declare. But the gold, with which the colors were interwoven, or those colored things, represents the vital bond by which elements are connected in composite things. But the ephod signifies the upper hemisphere, in which are two onyx stones, that is, two great luminaries shining from above. Moreover, the girdle, by which the priest's chest is bound, and the linen tunic, some wish to signify the Ocean, others indeed the Zodiac: but we can say both: For in that the linen garment, that is, the earth, is girded, it is the Ocean surrounding the earth: But in that it encircles the priest's chest, which is the center of the lesser world, the Zodiac is understood, encompassing all the central parts of the greater world. The breastplate, placed in the middle of the chest, they explain as representing the earth and its adornment, clothed with flowers, herbs, and fruits: Which, holding the center of this mundane body, receives the virtues of the twelve signs, which the twelve stones fixed in that breastplate represent. But by the four rows, in each of which are three stones, the four seasons of the year are distinguished, by which the earth is variously arranged, giving three months to each season. Or by the four rows are represented the natures of the four signs, since three are found in the property of each element. And so that all things which are in the breastplate may be applied to the earth, they also wish that by Urim and Thummim clarities and perfections may be signified: which are everywhere recognized on earth, where the effects of secondary causes appear: For here we somehow comprehend how clear and how perfect are the works of God and His ministers. Therefore, this very thing, which is in the middle, is beautifully called 'rationale' (breastplate): because in this middle earth the reason of secondary causes and the effects of the supreme God are perceived by purified minds: For all things here are full of reason, with earthly things corresponding to and connected with heavenly things. Hence the breastplate is said to be bound with the ephod, that is, the shoulder-garment. And explaining Urim and Thummim more clearly, they say they signify the truth and perfection of things, truth indeed, because everything that exists is also true: as the Metaphysicians say: In the same way, everything that exists is good, as Scripture says: God saw all that He had made, and [Marginal note: Metaph. Genesis.] it was very good, that is, perfect in its kind. Nor is it without reason that in the priest sacrificing to the Supreme Creator, His own creation is figured, with truth, or clarity, and goodness added in him who ought to instruct the people with the splendor of doctrine and the perfection of good works: so much so that his steps (as Jerome says), movements, and all that he does, are vocal. [Marginal note: Hieron.] Therefore, let him receive truth and divine splendor in his mind, and let him resonate with it in his whole habit and adornment, so that whatever he does, whatever he says, may thus be the doctrine of the people. But the miter and the hyacinth ribbon, beyond all controversy, show heaven: which ought always to be upon the priest's head, and presented to his eyes, and never to be laid aside: On which is a golden plate inscribed with the great name of God: From which we learn that in heaven is the great name of God

--- Page 587 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

[Marginal note: Abraham] inscribed, presiding over, and sealing all twelve signs, and all corners of the world, as we are taught in the book of formation, which is ascribed to Abraham: From which name all things receive strength and nourishment. But the name is said to be inscribed on a plate of gold, which we find signifies natural and spiritual life. And not unfittingly, because it is solar, and consistent with the celestial sun, which is called the giver of natural life, and with the supramundane sun, which bestows spiritual life. The High Priest, therefore, bearing the trace of all creatures and of the whole world, indicated, when he sacrificed to God, that all things needed His mercy and favor, by which they ought to be expiated and cherished: And thus he prayed not only for his children, parents, and relatives, but for every creature, by voice and by attire. And the garments of this high priest [Marginal note: Exodus Leviticus] are commanded to be made in Exodus, but in Leviticus, Aaron is clothed with them by Moses (God commanding): because these things are to be learned from the law, and assumed by God's command. [Marginal note: Paul] For no one ought to assume honor for himself, unless (as the Apostle says) he is called by God, just as Aaron was: nor ought he to presume to judge what is pleasing to God, unless God Himself dictates it.

**What these figurative garments pertain to for the priests of Christ. Chapter VI.**

[Ornate initial C] Since all things happened to those fathers in figure, and all these sacred things (as Origen says) refer to Christ the High Priest, and to those things which He commands His Christian followers to do, we will first see how all these things come into the use of Christian priests, and afterwards we will discuss how all these same things are concluded and resolved in Christ. But here I deem it necessary to state beforehand that priests and pontiffs were washed before they put on any of those garments, as we read in [Marginal note: Leviticus] Leviticus: Where it is stated that by the Lord's command, Aaron and his sons were called to the door of the tabernacle with a bullock for a sin offering, and two rams, and baskets of unleavened bread, and the assembly of the children of Israel having been called before the doors of the tabernacle, Moses said: "This is the word which the Lord has commanded to be done:" And immediately he presented Aaron and his sons, and washed them, and clothed the high priest with a linen tunic, girding him with a belt, and putting on him a hyacinthine tunic, and over it he placed the ephod, which he fastened with a girdle, fitting it to the rational (breastplate), in which were the Urim and Thummim. He also covered his head with a turban, and on it, against his forehead, he placed a golden plate consecrated for sanctification, as the Lord had commanded. The priest, therefore, was washed before he put on any garment, but that washing was by the power and judgment of the law, which the Lord gave through Moses, therefore it is said that he was washed by [Marginal note: Jerome] Moses: Which, however (as Jerome says), prefigured the purification of the world, and the sacrament of baptism, or of penance: in which we are washed before we put on [Marginal note: Paul] that sacred garment, concerning which Paul says: "Put on our Lord Jesus Christ:" indeed, He Himself also willed to be washed in the Jordan, and to be clothed, and to be filled with the Holy Spirit, who ascended upon Him as He came out of the washing, in the form of a dove,

--- Page 588 ---
THIRD TONE.                                                                    224
before he entered into sacred rites, and into the expiation of the human race: Which, being baptized,
he immediately began, having taken up the struggle in the wilderness against the enemy of the human race,
afterwards continuing to teach and heal; and finally offering himself as a sacrifice. The priest, having been washed,
therefore, was first clothed with an undergarment or breeches; because he who is about to sacrifice
must first observe this, that he gird his loins, since not even serving his wife by right
of marriage can he properly devote himself to God and sacred rites, unless he abstains from the marital act.
Hence the Apostle, teaching married people, that each should render to the other what is due (because   [Marginal note: Paul]
neither has power over their own body, but each over the other's) adds: Except that you may devote yourselves
to prayer for a time: Which would be nothing, unless it presupposed that no one could
serve marital matters, and prayer, and other sacred rites simultaneously: Because just as we cannot
serve God and mammon, so neither can we serve the spirit and the flesh, the ambition of the world, and the yoke
of Christ.

He was afterwards girded with a belt made of four colors, by which (as
we have said) the four primary elements and all things composed of them are understood,
signifying that all these things, which are called of this world, and are from corruptible
elements, ought to be bound and tied to the thigh and lower part: so that, left there,
they may not hinder the upper part of the priest, when acting in sacred rites, he is
about to sacrifice to God.

He is afterwards clothed with a hyacinth-colored tunic, so that from its color he may learn to become entirely
heavenly: For this, tending towards the sapphire heaven, invites the priest to the heavenly dwelling,
which Ezekiel saw to be of sapphire color: And this is to be declared in its proper place with a great mystery.   [Marginal note: Ezek.]

And a shoulder-garment was placed over it, of the same colors
as the belt, interwoven, so that these changeable elements with their composites
having now been dismissed to the animal part, he may raise his mind to better, heavenly, and
divine elements (of which we spoke above): Which also the stone *shoham*,
that is, onyx, bound with gold on each shoulder, designates: For this stone is
earthy around the center, but sapphire on the surface: by which it is taught that, with earthly things
now confined to the center and around the lowest parts, the priest may appear heavenly everywhere.

And because
it is the priest's role, as a mediating hierarch, to lead the lowest to the highest, and the people
entrusted to him to God, therefore it is said that on those stones were inscribed the names
of the sons of Israel, and consequently of all the tribes descending from them,
so that, presenting the whole people to God in sacrifice, he might reconcile them with Him.

But as for the names of the greater being placed on the right, and those of the lesser on the left,
I believe this signifies that greater things are given to the greater, not indeed
by age, but by virtues and merits: and lesser things are given to the lesser and less deserving.
Many things could be said about particular sons and tribes: and how, by God's
favor, they were figuratively placed in camps: and what is signified by the right and
left, which are not for the present discussion, therefore let us come to those things which
the priests of our time ought to bear: who bear not the names of the sons of Israel and the four-letter name,
but the names of the Apostles, who stand for the sons of Israel in the church;
and the name of JESUS, in which is the power of the Tetragrammaton. In the foundations of the holy and new
city descending from heaven (says John) were written the names of the Apostles.   [Marginal note: John]

--- Page 589 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

of them, and of the Lamb: Whence any priest of this city, performing the office of a true
priest, ought to possess these names, that is, the virtue and favor of those who laid
the primary foundations of that city. Hence, a priest about to celebrate in the canon
of the Mass, after God the Father, and Jesus Christ His Son, names the Apostles, and some
others who, if not the primary, at least laid the secondary foundations, imploring
their intercession. Afterwards, the most sacred rational (breastplate) was attached
with twelve precious stones, and Urim and Thummim: And the rational was bound to the
ephod (shoulder-piece), both twelvefold: For on the ephod were inscribed
the twelve names of the sons of Israel on two onyx stones: But on the breastplate
or rational were twelve precious stones, in four rows, with twelve
engraved names corresponding to a great mystery of the twelve names
existing behind: Which we do not doubt was done with great sacrament:
For the earthly twelve corresponds to the heavenly twelve, which we have
very often shown to be celebrated elsewhere. And the evangelical twelve,
figured in the precious stones of the breastplate, is equated with the legal twelve, which was con-
tained in the two stones of the ephod. Therefore, the twelve precious
stones existing on the breastplate of the ephod represent the twelve Apostolic princes
with the twelvefold family of twelve thousand elect, each having twelve
[Marginal note: Paul] fruits which the tree of life produces: Which are named by Paul as fruits of the Spirit:
For life and spirit are the same, since spirit is life, and provides life to others. But
some are fruits which we produce on earth by God's grace, and others which we gather
in eternal blessedness: And those which we produce on earth ought to correspond to these heavenly ones,
and the earthly twelve to the heavenly twelve, and the evangelical twelvefold family
to the figurative twelvefold family, and be bound to each other, just as the breastplate
with the ephod, because our High Priest Christ made one out of both:
Which we leave to be explained in its proper place. Moreover, on that breastplate, or ra-
tional, were Urim and Thummim, which, somehow, they have interpreted as doctrine and
truth: For Urim (אור) comes from אור, which signifies light: Whence Urim (clarities
and illuminations of doctrine and spirit) seems to me to signify: which the priest ought
to have, who performs the office of mediator between God and man, and
provides leadership to the people towards God. For a leader will not know, nor be able to direct any-
one on a path he does not know: Nor will a blind man be able to provide good leadership to another: Nor
will he find propitiation with God who is not illuminated by the light of His grace:
because we can know neither God nor divine things without His light. Therefore,
the pontiff ought to be clear and illuminated by doctrine, knowledge of both testaments,
and spirit, so that he may know what he does, and understand by what way he leads the people, and
recognize what God demands from us for our purification and sanctification.
By this mystery, our pontiffs are said to wear that two-part miter, so that
the expertise which the pontiffs themselves ought to have in both testaments may be signified:
although in most cases of our time, the reality falls too short of the sacrament. To be

--- Page 590 ---
VOLUME THREE. 225

also the pontiff ought to be pure, clean, and perfect, lest, being hateful to God, he place an obstacle rather than a propitiation between God himself and the people: And this signifies that תמים tumim, which we can interpret as immaculate, perfect, complete, simple, and without defect. Hence such diligence is commanded that a priest not only guard against sins, but also be undefiled by a dead person, and also by a woman who has granted her body to another man: Likewise, that he be free from leprosy, from a flow of blood, from a hernia: and that he be whole in all his members, not blind, not lame, not hunchbacked, not with an excessively large and deformed nose: all of which are tolerated in others, but by no means in a priest: because he ought to be complete with every intrinsic and extrinsic perfection. Concerning the former, it is said verbatim in Leviticus: 'Let the high priest [Marginal note: Leviticus.] from among his brethren, on whose head the anointing oil has been poured, and whose hands have been filled, that is, with good works for vesting, namely, priestly vestments, not uncover his head, and not tear his garments, and by no means come near any dead body, even for his father or his mother he shall not be defiled: And he shall not go out from the sanctuary, and he shall not profane the holy things of his God: because נזר nezer, that is, a Nazirite, that is, separated, namely from the crowd, or crowned, namely with a crown of holiness: The oil of the chrism of his God is upon him: I am the Lord.' These words are full of mysteries: But let us briefly run through what they signify: The oil, which is poured upon the head of the priest, is divinity, with which the priest ought to be imbued above the crowd, especially in the head, where that supreme portion of the soul resides, which is divine: and by which we understand God, and by it we perform those things which are pleasing to God himself, provided it is sprinkled with His grace. Therefore, in Pontiffs, Kings, and prophets, who were anointed, it ought to be sprinkled with a particular outpouring. The filling of the hands, however, signifies the multitude of good works, with which the priest ought to be filled. Therefore, imbued with divinity, and made divine, and full of good works, he should also assume the habit of divine ministry, which is pontifical or priestly: He should not uncover his head by removing the turban, which (as we have said) signifies the upper hemisphere: by which the priest's head ought to be covered. And to speak more clearly, [Marginal note: CHRIST.] he should never lay aside heavenly things, but always direct his mind and soul towards them: For if it has been enjoined by Christ upon all to pray always and never to faint, then each one ought always to have his soul and mind in heaven, since he does not pray with his mind who does not have it elevated to God: Prayer (says Damascene) is the elevation of the mind [Marginal note: Damas.] to God. Much more therefore ought the priest, who prays for himself and for the people, always to have his mind and head raised to heaven, and overshadowed by divine covering. He should also not tear his garment. There are two kinds of garments that every Christian ought to wear: One is that of baptism, concerning which Jerome [Marginal note: Jerome.] says: 'I received the garment of Christ in Rome': for he was speaking of baptism: The other is that of penance, which is a second garment covering the nakedness of those who have lost the baptismal garment: And God clothed the first man with this, and all who, having fallen into sins, are saved: concerning whom the prophet says: 'Blessed are those whose sins are forgiven [Marginal note: David] FF

--- Page 591 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

iniquities, and whose sins are covered. And with this twofold kind of garment was clothed our High Priest Christ, not for himself, but for all whose sins he bore: For one was the seamless tunic, which signifies the garment of baptism, indivisible, and never to be repeated: The other was divisible by part, and part: And this signifies the garment of penance, to be resumed as often as a person sins, as Christ himself said to Peter, to whom he had especially given the power of putting on this garment: [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] "I do not say to you seven times, but seventy times seven," that is, as often as necessary, as all explain: Moreover, both use the remissive number seven, but Christ multiplies by ten, and by that seven deduced from the complete ten, it squares, not without a mystery to be declared in its proper place: From all these repeated acts of penance, only one garment is made, which is unique: although divisible in the way we have said. However, neither of these should the priest and pontiff tear, but he should keep both untorn, lest his shameful nakedness ever appear with the garment torn by sin, because it is his duty to clothe the naked. Therefore, he ought to be unpolluted, holy, and clean. Nor does it hinder that he first offers for his own sin a calf, two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread, since no one is called clean from defilement, not even an infant of one day: because we are all born children of wrath, and subject to sin. Indeed there are sins, which are called venial, and do not tear the garments, and are worthy of easy pardon: from which nevertheless the priest ought to be clean, wishing to deal with a holy, clean, and pure God. Hence it follows that he should not approach any dead body, lest he be polluted and defiled by the dead, even if it were his own father or mother: From this it is understood how much greater purity is required in a pontiff than in a priest, since to the latter is granted at the beginning of the chapter access to the funeral of a father, mother, son, daughter, also brother, and virgin sister: But to the high pontiff access to any funeral whatsoever is forbidden. And what defilement a corpse contains, so that it can defile one approaching it, is not the subject of the present treatise: This, however, I will say, that the ancient Fathers, more skilled in spiritual matters than those who fantasize about finding relations and quiddities, which they never find, not without reason ordained that a corpse be buried in a sacred place, be accompanied by light as long as it remains above ground, be sprinkled with holy water, and be censed with incense: All these things were ordained not in vain, as the common people think, but for the expiation of the corpse, which is very unclean: And who would not be burdened by this defilement, defiled by a mortal, indeed, when it is justly incurred, when someone out of charity commits a dead person to the tomb, nevertheless, God commands the priest to be immune even from this defilement. He also commands that he never leave the sanctuary, but always (if possible) be holy, he who is about to minister to the Holy of Holies: For he is a Nazirite, that is, separated from the defiled crowd, and from common works defiling his dignity: Or a Nazirite, that is, crowned with the diadem of holiness, and infused with the oil of divinity. God then adds after all these things: "I am the Lord," that is, "I am Adonai,"

--- Page 592 ---
uel quadriliterus, qui uidelicet sanctissimus, & purissimus sum, ideo exquiro mi
nistros meos puros, & sanctos, sicuti alibi clara uoce ait: Sancti estote, quoniã
ego sanctus sum. Nec uult, q̃ foedetur sacerdos cum muliere uidua, repudiata,
sordida, aut meretrice, sed habeat uxorẽ uirginem, cũ qua copulatus sacramen
tũ teneat unicæ copulæ, quã cũ Deo habere debemus nuptiis, ad quas plerisq; in
locis scripturæ sacræ inuitamur: Quod & in sacerdotibus nostris obseruatur,
& dicũtur irregulares ex digamia, qui duobus mulieribus copulati sunt, aut cũ
muliere, quæ ab alio uiro cognita est: ne uioletur sacramẽtũ bifario matrimo-
nio. Sed heu infælicia tempora, & perditos mores, quãdo uerba statuti, & le-
gis præcepta seruantur tãtũmodo in cortice deprauato trũco, & putrefacta

or the Four-Lettered One, who, of course, I am most holy and most pure, therefore I seek my
ministers pure and holy, just as He says elsewhere with a clear voice: "Be holy, because
I am holy." Nor does He wish that a priest be defiled with a widow, a divorced woman,
a sordid woman, or a harlot, but that he should have a virgin wife, with whom, being joined, he should hold the sacrament
of a single union, which we ought to have with God in marriage, to which in many
places of sacred scripture we are invited. This is also observed among our priests,
and those are called irregular by reason of digamy who have been joined to two women, or with
a woman who has been known by another man, lest the sacrament of double marriage
be violated. But alas for unhappy times and corrupt morals, when the words of the statute and the precepts of the law
are observed only in the bark of a depraved and rotten trunk, and decayed

--- Page 593 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

rotten internally, and pompous, since they can gain no glory for the head from worldly ornaments, which signifies Christ. Or let us say that this discourse is for common men and women, not for the pontiff or priest: so that from this it can be concluded that tonsure is necessary for the pontiff or priest. But whatever it may be, I commit myself and all my possessions to God and the Holy Church. Finally, a golden plate is said to have been placed upon the head of the priest, on which the great name of God was inscribed: Which
[Marginal note: Revelation] is also inscribed on the forehead of every believer: as it is said in Revelation: "To him who overcomes, I will write on him the name of my God." And John, coming to the number of the peculiar elect, says: "I saw the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with him one hundred and forty-four thousand who had his name and his Father's name written on their foreheads." These one hundred and forty-four thousand are gathered from those twelve thousands, from each tribe, a great mystery to be explained in its proper place: If all soldiers bear this name of Christ and God, as a mark, and stigma, or emblem of the Christian religion, how much more ought the Supreme Pontiff, together with the priests, who are like angels and leaders of the divine army, to bear it? But the highest and greatest Pontiff as the leader of the entire imperial militia, while the other priests are like the leaders of private legions or cohorts. Let us now see what these things have to do with Christ, the Supreme Pontiff, to whom all these things tend.

What all those vestments have to do with Christ, whom they pre-eminently prefigured. Chapter VII.
[Decorative initial I] Now we must come to Christ, to whom all things tend, and to whom all things look, as to the Lord of all things, for whom all those things were ordained, and in whom all things ought to be verified: Because Moses is always with Christ, and the law with the gospel: Therefore Peter is noted for error, who on Mount Tabor, when Moses was present with Christ, wanted to make three tabernacles, when one would suffice for Christ, Moses, and Elijah: For the law, prophecy, and gospel are one: and one so corresponding and connected to the other, that they are entirely the same: Which we can see, provided that God in His goodness removes the veil from us, so that with unveiled face we may be able to contemplate the glory of the Lord, transformed ourselves into the same image of the true Son of God, who was first contained under the enigmas of the law and the prophets: Whom, now revealed to us, we shall contemplate as we ascend from the clarity of the law to the clarity of the
[Marginal note: Leviticus.] gospel. It is said in Leviticus, that when the multitude was gathered at the door of the tabernacle, Aaron was appointed priest by Moses: Who had summoned him there with his sons, and with a calf for sin, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread: Did not Christ also, wishing to offer a unique sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, presenting himself as a victim for sin, for transgression, for error, for iniquity, for trespass, for rebellion, and for every crime that was not purified by the sacrifice of the law, come outside the gate, accompanied by a great multitude of Hebrews, Romans, and all nations, appointed priest not indeed by Moses, that is, by the law, but by God

--- Page 594 ---
**TONVS TERTIVS.** **227**

...by the Father, who swore and will not repent it, that he should be a priest forever, he finally offered himself as a sacrifice pleasing to God the Father himself, incorporating in himself the power, mysteries, and significations of calves, goats, unleavened bread, and all things which were offered by the legal priest? Did he not, even before he ascended to the altar of the cross, precede it with a washing better than Aaron's? Indeed, he willed to be washed by the Baptist in the Jordan, making himself the washing by which all impurities might be washed away. Nor yet content with this washing, he willed to wash the feet of the disciples with that washing which he had already consecrated himself: To Peter, not understanding this mystery, he said: "What I do, you do not know now, but you will know hereafter, when, that is, you will understand by what sacrament, by what washing, by what water I have washed you." [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] Indeed, he understood, with the Holy Spirit teaching, who suggested and declared all things, that before we do anything with the most pure God, it is necessary that we be baptized and cleansed by the washing of baptism made from water, which is the Son of God himself: who washed us (says John) from our sins through true baptism: [Marginal note: Ioan.] And he washes away affections signified by the feet by word and love, according to what he said: "You are clean because of the word which I have spoken to you, [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] full, that is, of doctrine and love." Therefore, a washing having been performed first, he took up garments, nay, he made himself a garment, with which he might cover our nakedness, just as he had made himself the water by which we might be washed, and the sacrifice which he might offer for us, the bread by which he might feed us,

--- Page 595 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

he penetrated the heavens, having become better than them. For indeed, the heaven was the highest figurative covering of the ark, otherwise called the mercy seat, because from there propitiations were made, as we read in Exodus: In a similar, and better, way, from the body of our High Priest, that is, from those things which he bore in his own body, remissions are made for all of us. But in mind he penetrated the heavens, ascending to the right hand of the Father in the highest, so that he might be a mediator between the Father of all, and us: And he wore attached seventy-two pomegranates and seventy-two bells of each kind: Which bells we say signify the seventy-two princes set over seventy-two languages with the peoples entrusted to them, figured in as many pomegranates, because he called to himself all those divine powers and the virtues of those intelligences themselves, subjecting all things to himself, as the Apostle says: Because in him dwells all the fullness of divinity bodily, so that just as through him God, and in him all things were created, so in the body he might be the head of the church, holding primacy in all things: And asserting with the Hebrews that that of the prophet was said of Christ: "You have subjected all things under his feet," he adds: "For in that he subjected all things, he left nothing not subjected to him." That there are princes of provinces and peoples, no one among those who study sacred letters doubts, as we are taught in many places, especially by Dionysius and Daniel; who commemorates an angel, prince of the Persians, and Michael standing for the Israelite people. But all those yielded to Christ coming, indeed, subjected to him, whatever they do thereafter, they accomplish by his command. The peoples also, entrusted to them, signified by the pomegranates, are disposed by the will of Christ our High Priest. Hence he not only cares for the Israelite family, but from every nation that is under heaven, and from all peoples (as John says), and from all tribes and tongues, he gathered his church. Therefore he rightly wore the ephod with stones, on which were written the names of the sons of Israel: because on his shoulders he bore the entire Israelite family, both cleansing and saving it: And what seems hard, he says: "I have not come, except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel:" Which however must be understood concerning both families, namely, the figurative and the true: which is the church, and the collection of all the faithful, as we shall declare below (God willing): And therefore the breastplate and the ephod are said to be bound together by their chains, passing through four rings on each side: From which it is hinted that both families are bound together by the quaternary of the great name, by which all things are bound, and in which all are saved. But these names are said to be written on onyx stones, which below, around the center, are earthly, but on the surface, heavenly: in which it is hinted that he intends to make that entire family, which was earthly and animalistic, heavenly. He also took the Choshen [Hebrew: חושן], which the Greeks call 'logion,' that is, the rational: and it is a breastplate ornament, in which were twelve precious stones with the twelve names of the sons of Israel. But those names were borne engraved on the two stones of the ephod, and on the twelve stones of the breastplate: From which it is expressly demonstrated our High Priest Christ: who ascended the altar of the cross to pray and to sacrifice for both twelve-fold families: Of which the figurative was contained on the back by two stones—

--- Page 596 ---
TOMVS TERTIVS. 228

—of onyx, but the true [family] was inscribed on twelve precious and varied stones: This is why that family of Patriarchs was not gathered from every nation contained under the twelve celestial signs, but was begotten from one race, and from one Father, Jacob: Nevertheless, it is called bipartite, because from the same family there are those who ought to be placed on the right, and those who ought to be placed on the left. But this new family, and new bride descending from heaven, was gathered by our High Priest JESUS from every tribe, tongue, people, and nation that is under heaven, divided especially into twelve parts contained under the twelve celestial signs: Therefore it is said to be inscribed on twelve precious stones: because all things that have been done in this family can deservedly be called precious. But to each stone we could apply a twelfth part of this new family with its twelve leaders: But we will reserve this to be done in its proper place (God willing).

But why the breastplate itself is said to be woven from the four often-mentioned colors, we will easily be able to explain, if we remember that we said those four colors signify the four elements, from which all things are composed, and into which even heaven itself is said to be divided, and composed of them, not indeed from these corruptible elements, but from better ones. Hence, three of its signs are called earthy, three watery, as many airy, and the rest fiery: To which all corresponding things agree, so much so that all things, both celestial and terrestrial, are distributed to those elements signified by the four colors: Therefore, the type of both families is distinguished by those four colors.

But those two sacraments, which are called Urim and Thummim, so perfectly suit Christ our High Priest, that he not only bears them, but is entirely the very thing that is signified by them, however they may be interpreted: For if it is translated as doctrine and truth, he himself publicly proclaims: I am the truth: and my doctrine [CHRI STVS.] is not of my own origin, but of him who sent me, but communicated to me in such a way that by word and deed I am the doctrine of the peoples: because every action of Christ was our instruction. But if they are interpreted as clarity and perfection, he was the light illuminating every man, and so immaculate and perfect, that he might present us immaculate to God the Father by his grace and merits. And if the whole breastplate is called logion, that is, verbal, or rational, is he not the Word, in whom are all the rules both of created things and of those things which we ought to do? He also offers to all the reason for understanding and acting: And it is called double, because there were two natures: in each of which we find pasture for reason and understanding.

The breastplate and ephod were also bound with hyacinthine ribbons and golden chains in two sets of four rings, which were four on one, four on the other, corresponding to each other: But what better hyacinthine and celestial ribbon than he who is entirely celestial, who descended from heaven to make us celestial? And what is this golden chain, if not charity and love, by which our High Priest came to bind us, aiming at this with every word and work of his? Therefore he bound both families, the ancient and the new: he bound celestial and terrestrial things: he bound creation with God, just as in himself were bound two

FF iiij

--- Page 597 ---
CANTICLE TWO

...nature, and from both one was made. Finally, he bound all the members, himself being the head, and the compaction of the nerves. There remains the golden plate, on which was written the great four-letter name of God: which is explained in the name of forty-two letters, in which God fashioned the world, as all agree who treat of such names: Which name is fitting, and to be combined with the name of our greatest High Priest ישו (Yeshu/Jesus), whose letters all render 316 in number: To which if forty-two are added, one ascends to 358, which is the numerical value of this rational name, which is משיח (Messiah), for it gives 300, 40, 10, 8, which, when calculated, give me 358. From which it is concluded by the more skilled in this sacred art, namely the arithmetic of divine letters, that that most mysterious breastplate, in which were inscribed twelve precious stones with the names of the chosen family, and with the most sacred Urim and Thummim, in which shone forth all things to be understood and done, truly represented Christ: in whom is the power of the created world, as John says [Marginal note: John]: All things were made through the Word. Behold then how well that name of forty-two letters, in which the world was fashioned, agrees with JESUS: But we enter into so many and such great mysteries, that if we wished to explain all that would occur here, neither would my strength suffice for speaking, nor would readers perceive what was written. Nor is it fitting that those things which are to be communicated orally [Marginal note: David] among a few wise men should be committed to public letters: I have hidden (says the prophet) your words in my heart, that I might not sin against you. Lest, however, hungry readers be entirely dismissed, we will touch upon a few things. If all those elect and consecrated are said to have the name of the Lamb and the name of their Father written on their foreheads, it is no wonder if we say that the firstborn Son of God among many brethren, and to whom the Father gave all things, has the name of God himself in him. And here, I ask, let readers note why our great High Priest himself in the days of his flesh said: [Marginal note: CHRIST.] Whatever you ask the Father in my name, he will give you: when afterwards, rising again, he says: In my name they will cast out demons: and other things which follow: Where, with careful inquiry, it must be noted why he is silent about the great name of God, in which Moses, the Fathers, and all the prophets from him up to Christ, whatever wondrous things they did, accomplished: And which is sung with such solemnity by the divine psalmist in many places: And nevertheless, with this passed over in silence, our Jesus proposes only his own name, in which he teaches us to ask and seek from the Father whatever we desire to have. Did he wish to arrogate to himself what he ought not? Far from it: For he did not consider equality with God something to be grasped. But he did this because he perceived the power of the great name given to him by the Father, and concluded within his own name. Therefore, he gave power to men, that they might perform miracles, speak in tongues, and such things, which were done by the power of the great four-letter name. But in the course of our time, from Jesus onwards, we ought to bear the name of Jesus himself, and consequently the great name of God enclosed within the name of Jesus himself: and this bound on our foreheads with a hyacinthine and heavenly ribbon, that is, by life, conduct, and mind.

--- Page 598 ---
TOMVS TERTIVS. 229

heavenly, and spiritual: because (as the Apostle says) No one can say ‘Lord
Jesus’ except in the Holy Spirit. Therefore, not by naming Jesus with a defiled mouth, or as if it were the name of some man, or even an individual assumed by divinity, professing it with the mouth, and understanding it according to the doctrines of men, can we perform miracles in the virtue of that name:
but by calling upon it in the Holy Spirit with a purified mind and fervent soul, we shall obtain those things which are promised in this name, especially with prior knowledge, according to that prophetic saying: ‘I will protect him, because he has known my name.’ Now therefore, in the name of Jesus miracles are done, and salvation is given, because there is (says Peter) no other name under heaven given among men by which men must be saved, but this one:
[Marginal note: Petrus:]
concerning which, and its virtue, and how other names are enclosed in Him to whom the Father gave all things, wishing to speak, we could adduce that saying of Paul: ‘Our discourse is great and difficult to explain, and many have become weak in understanding:’ especially those who wish to have Aristotle and Averroes as guides in the most sacred mysteries of God: For these things are not learned in the schools or gymnasia of the Gentiles, but from the Holy Spirit: and only those receive them from divine light who have been chosen by the Eternal Father for such things, as the Son says: ‘Father, I have manifested your name to the men whom you gave me.’ He said
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
‘your name’ speaking with the Father, and the Son, who was speaking, manifested His own: This is because the Father’s name was included in His own: Which name, and how one is included in the other, not even the whole world could understand at once, unless He Himself revealed it: because these things are hidden from the wise and prudent, and revealed to little ones, and to those who are of a pure and clean heart.

Christ is a priest forever. Chapter VIII.
[Large decorative initial V] Therefore our Christ is the true Priest and High Pontiff,
exercising an eternal priesthood, as Paul says to the Hebrews:
[Marginal note: Paulus]
‘Indeed, many priests were made according to the law, because they were prevented from remaining by death: But He, because He remains forever, has an eternal priesthood: Therefore He is also able to save forever those who approach God through Himself, always living to intercede for us.’ Hence David foretold by the prophetic Spirit: ‘You are a priest forever.’
[Marginal note: Dauid]
Nor is He hindered by death from exercising a perpetual priesthood: indeed, in death He offered Himself as a consecrated victim to God the Father, and through resurrection changed for the better: Hence, remaining and unfailing, He always and perseveringly stands before God, that He may be an eternal propitiation for our sins: Through which, presented to the eternal Father and the divine tribunal, He intercedes for us, obtaining pardon through it, and release from debts: For He paid all things with His shed blood, by which He also presents us clean to God day by day, whom He purified by His death and sacrifice once offered: This indeed (the Apostle adds) He did by offering Himself once.
[Marginal note: Paulus]
And such a pontiff He became, who sat down at the right hand of the throne of majesty in the heavens, a minister of the holy places, and of the true tabernacle, which God pitched, and not man. Therefore Christ exercises the priesthood—

FF v.

--- Page 599 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

priesthood eternal in heaven, better than Michael, of whom it is said that he is a priest and prince over all souls to be received, and no less over bodies: For he even contended with the devil for the body of Moses, as Thaddeus relates in his canonical epistle: For the devil wanted to take it away, as being subject to sin; but Michael, on the contrary, wanted to present it to God, as purified by the law and cleansed by divine communion: whence he had brought his face to such brightness that the children of Israel could not gaze upon it because of the splendor of his countenance: Which we believe was also rightly done by our eternal priest, of whom Moses himself said many things, so that that soul and body, now purified, could be presented to God. Therefore Michael fought as a true priest, and the Angels, that is, his ministers, with him for the souls of all, against the ancient serpent, who continually seeks them to devour them: But Michael prevailed, and the dragon was cast out. Nor is he less now, [Marginal note: Daniel.] and he continually comes to the aid of God's people, as we read in Daniel: "Michael, the great prince, who stands for the children of your people," that is, for the elect. Of this the Church sings, that he has been appointed prince over all the elect souls to be received by God. If therefore Michael exercises a perpetual priesthood, having continuous care of souls, how much more ought the Son of God and High Priest Christ, to whom has been given the complete redemption of these very souls, and who by his offered sacrifice has found for us a continuous and perpetual eternal redemption, exercise an eternal priesthood, continually interceding before the face of God for all souls, for whom he offered himself as a sacrifice, [Marginal note: John] and a victim: And this is what John says: "If anyone sins, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world."

**Why Christ was a priest by an oath. Chapter IX.**

[Marginal note: Paul] **H**Our Paul, educated at the feet of Gamaliel and instructed in the third heaven, did not keep silent about how Christ was constituted a priest by an oath, saying to the Hebrews: "Other priests indeed were made without an oath, but he with an oath by him who said [Marginal note: David] to him: 'The Lord has sworn and will not change his mind, "You are a priest forever."'" But what this oath implies, and how it binds all who swear so that they cannot depart from the oath without cause, this mystery is hidden. The more recondite Hebrews say that an oath connects many things, especially that exalted septenary (sevenfold principle) from which all things proceed, just as the words for 'oath' and 'septenary' are the same in their language, so much so that השבע (hasbah), which means 'he swore,' comes from שבע (sheva), which means 'seven,' so that according to their understanding, 'He swore' means 'he sevened,' or 'he attested by seven,' and brought those seven as witnesses: Wishing to signify this, Abraham, when he made a covenant with Abimelech, set seven ewe-lambs as a testimony; through these seven ewe-lambs he intended to represent that exalted septenary, according to which stand the seven spirits who are in the presence of the throne of God. Hence, the transgression of an oath is, in a way, to wish to make those witnesses false...

--- Page 600 ---
TONE THREE. 230

false witnesses, and to deprive themselves of the influence of those, from whom comes all good. Therefore the Lord swore to Christ, appealing to Him through that septenary, and communicating to Him His septenary influence in every way, according to that oracle of Isaiah, in which concerning Christ made a pri- [Marginal note: Isaias] est by this oath it says: "A shoot will come out from the root of Jesse, and a flower from his root will ascend, and the Spirit of the Lord will rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom, and understanding, the spirit of counsel, and might, the spirit of knowledge, and piety: and the spirit of the fear of the Lord will rest upon him:" As if it were said, according to that septenary, the spirit of understanding will rest in him, and the remitter of faults: Also grace or piety, justice & terror, beauty & rectitude, victory & perpetuity, splendor & adornment, life & kingdom, so that not without cause he might say: [Marginal note: CHRIST. Origen.] "All things the Father gave to me." Which Origen, pondering, writing on that passage of Isaiah, [Marginal note: Isaias] "Seven women will take hold of one man," says: "The Holy Spirit with his gifts was upon many, but rested on none, except on JESUS: who is that unique bridegroom, whom the seven women, that is, that exalted septenary, apprehended with an indissoluble bond:" For the spirit of wisdom came with other gifts, upon Moses, but did not rest, [Marginal note: Moses.] especially when he erred in striking the rock, because of which the leadership of the people to the promised land was taken from him: It came upon Aaron, but in the sin of the [Marginal note: Aaron.] calf it departed: It came also upon Isaiah, but what did he say? [Marginal note: Isaias.] "I am a man of unclean lips:" It came also upon David, but feeling he had deserved that by which he would rightly be deprived, [Marginal note: David] he cried saying: "Do not take your Holy Spirit from me." And since there is no one who does not sin, there is no one from whom the spirit of the Lord does not depart for a time, except Jesus alone, of whom it was said to John: "Upon whom you see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, this is the Son of God, this is he who baptizes with the Holy Spirit, powerful to impart that very Spirit, which he firmly possesses, to others:" And because I saw (said [Marginal note: John.] John) the Spirit descending, and remaining, I bore witness, that this is the Son of God. Therefore the spirit remained, and that exalted septenary remained firmly upon Jesus, and without any interruption, and without any departure: But why this? Because the Lord swore, and will not repent: He swore, that he would be a priest forever: He swore, that he would be the High Priest: He swore, that he would be holy, pure, clean, and separated from sinners, so that he could take away the sins of all. And because he swore, therefore the spirit rested upon him, and that which is greater than all, which the Father gave to him: Whence that third thing is equated, namely שבת Sabat, which the [Marginal note: Hebrews.] Hebrews say agrees with the oath and the septenary: and signifies rest. Therefore the sevenfold spirit rested in him and that exalted septenary, because the almighty Father swore to him, that always remaining holy and divine, he would sanctify others, and make them divine.

How he was a priest according to the order of Melchizedek. Chapter X.
[Decorative initial V] By oath he constituted our Christ the High Priest, he established him according to the order of Melchizedek: Which since it is known to all, let us see therefore what is the order of Melchizedek, according to which Christ was constituted. Therefore, having discussed those things which in Genesis [Marginal note: Genesis.]

--- Page 601 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

[Marginal note: Paul] we read, and we find five things that are discussed twice by Paul with the Hebrews concerning this Melchizedek, in which our Christ agrees with him. Four are touched upon by Paul, of which the first is: because Melchizedek is introduced in scripture without father and mother, having neither beginning of days nor end, thus the Son of God was constituted priest without beginning and without end of days, since he is eternal; nor in
[Marginal note: The same] the priesthood is a father or mother assigned. Therefore Paul says: In this, Melchizedek
[Marginal note: Rabbi Solomon, Hebrews] was made like the Son of God. However, Rabbi Solomon says, and with him many wise men
[Marginal note: Jerome, Shem] of the Hebrews, to whom Jerome assents, that Melchizedek is an appellative name, and signifies a just king, whose proper name is Shem: he, of course, the son of Noah: and thus we have his father, although not expressly from scripture: Thus also our Christ has a father, although not expressed, where his priesthood is discussed.

The second is, because he was king of Salem, that is, of peace, signifying our Christ as High Priest and king of true peace: who came to give and leave that true peace to us: which the world cannot give: Therefore, as he entered the world, his ministers sang: And on earth peace to men of good will: And leaving the world,
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] he himself said to his disciples: My peace I give to you, my peace I leave to you; not as the world gives, do I give to you.

The third is the interpretation of the name, which is
[Marginal note: Isaiah] king of righteousness, fitting with our Christ, concerning whom Isaiah says: And a king shall reign, and he shall be wise: and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the earth.

The fourth, which is inferred from this, is that just as Melchizedek was king and priest, so also is Christ: Who therefore came from the royal tribe of Judah, so that he might assume the kingdom by hereditary right according to the flesh, just as he had also received it from the heavenly Father, which he would also give to us together with the priesthood.
[Marginal note: John] Hence John in the Apocalypse: And he made us a kingdom and priests to God and his Father:
[Marginal note: Peter] With whom Peter, writing to the scattered strangers in Pontus, and Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, said: You are a chosen race, a royal priesthood.

The fifth, which I weigh more heavily, is the offering, which is reported to have been made by Melchizedek himself in bread alone and wine, no mention being made of animals or any other things whatsoever: Indeed, a rite most fitting for our High Priest Christ Jesus, who concluded every sacrifice in bread alone and wine, as in the primary substance of human food: To this sacrifice, all blood and the killing of animals, and whatever else was offered in the law, yielded: since now we do not need blood in which to be cleansed: because now in the blood of Christ the human race has been perfectly cleansed: and all things that were then unclean: because our law is of grace and watery, whence we no longer enter into this law or into the Christian family through the blood of circumcision, but through the water of baptism, then also, because nothing more expressly figures the mystical body of the universal church, of which Christ is the head, than bread: For this is made from many grains, and is the common and universal food of all nations: just as this mystical body is made up of many individuals of every nation that is under heaven. Hence this congregation is called the Catholic Church, that is, universal. And nothing more consonant with life than Chri

--- Page 602 ---
**TONUS TERTIUS.** [Page number] **231**

Christ came to give us that blood in which life most especially resides, as many wise men affirm and as we can clearly infer from sacred scripture. This, therefore, is the order of Melchisedech, in which our Christ was constituted priest and High Priest. And to him, as to the High Priest, Abraham gave, giving tithes of all things, and receiving a blessing from him. From which it is concluded that Melchisedech was greater than Abraham, by the argument of Paul, who says: [Marginal note: Paul] Without any contradiction, the lesser is blessed by the better. Since therefore he received tithes from Abraham, and consequently from Levi: who still (says [Marginal note: The same] Paul) was in his loins, and blessed him, he was greater than Abraham and Levi: and his priesthood greater than the Levitical and legal priesthood: this especially (as the [Marginal note: The same] Apostle weighs) because the legal priesthood ought to be transferred into that of Melchisedech, that is, into the priesthood of Christ, who was constituted priest according to the order of Melchisedech: Therefore Christ himself was not of the priesthood of Aaron, nor of the tribe of Levi, but of the royal tribe of Judah: so that it may be understood that the priesthood of Christ was royal, and according to the true order of a just king: Hence this declaration, "You are a priest forever according to the order of Melchisedech," was indeed a repudiation of the former commandment and priesthood, as weak and useless, since the law leads to no perfection. Therefore the priest who was made according to the law of a carnal commandment ought to cease, and he who was according to the power of an indissoluble life ought to arise: These things we have deduced from Paul. But why was Christ's eternal priesthood prefigured in the priesthood of Melchisedech? Responding to this, I will say with [Marginal note: Jerome] Jerome: If the vessel of election is amazed at the mystery, and confesses as ineffable that about which he disputes, how much more ought we, mere worms and gnats, to confess only the knowledge of our ignorance, and to have seen a most spacious house as if through a small hole? For great is the discourse, and interpretable to say, why Melchisedech was introduced without genealogy. And if the Hebrews truly say that he was Shem, what does this name Shem import, which translated into Latin signifies "name"? Perhaps that name which is above every name, just as when "virgin" is said, the Virgin who is above all virgins is understood: And the Apostle above all Apostles: and the Father above all fathers, and to conclude briefly from all things, in Melchisedech there was something divine and permanent, in which the eternal priesthood of Christ was represented: concerning which (as [Marginal note: Paul] Paul says) it is not lawful to speak, therefore let us come to other things.

**How much greater and better a priest Christ was than Aaron, and**
**all legal priests. Chapter XI.**

[Large decorative initial V] But how much our Christ, the High Priest, surpassed all other Levitical and legal priests, Paul clearly demonstrates, [Marginal note: The same] differing with the Hebrews: Where, after he had narrated many things about the legal priesthood and the tabernacle, he added: Christ, standing as High Priest of future good things, through a greater and more perfect tabernacle not made by hand, that is, not of this creation: Nor through the blood of goats or calves—

--- Page 603 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

calves, but through his own blood he entered once into the holy places, having found eternal redemption. Six points are touched upon by Paul, in which Christ was a more perfect and excellent high priest than the legal and figurative one: First, because they obtained propitiation from God, by which, being appeased, He would favor them with temporal goods, as is clear in the whole promise of the law, by which it is said: If you obey me, you shall eat the good things of the land: And your seed shall possess the gates of their enemies: And one of you shall put to flight a thousand, and two, ten thousand, and such like: All of which were temporal, although they were a figure of eternal things. To which things, wiser men sometimes entered speaking of the future age, of blessed life, and of the true paradise of delights: To whose state one did not arrive through sacrifice, but through a better lot, and the precious death of the saints, as it had come to the prophet. But let us speak of sacrifice, by which only some sins were expiated, and not all: Hence, those purified by them did not deserve eternal reward, but those things which were promised according to the present age.
[Marginal note: Paul] But our High Priest was made (says Paul) of future good things, therefore through something greater and more perfect. Secondly, the Levitical priest entered a tabernacle made by hand, indeed, wooden, afterwards stone when the temple was erected: But our High Priest entered a tabernacle not made by hand, that is, not of this creation: By which tabernacle Origen understands heaven: Which could be confirmed by the testimony of Paul saying: We have a great High Priest, who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God: And again: We have such a high priest, who is seated at the right hand of the throne of majesty in the heavens, a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which God pitched, and not man. But Origen himself strengthens his saying with the
[Marginal note: David] testimony of the divine Harper (David) saying: I remembered these things, and poured out my soul within me: for I will go into the place of the wonderful tabernacle, even to the house of God: And again in another psalm: Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, or who shall rest in thy holy mountain? He who walks without blemish, and works justice. And what is the place of the wonderful tabernacle, from which one arrives even to the house of God? And what is that tabernacle, of which the prophet, having become mindful, had his soul poured out within him, as if dissolved by some intolerable desire? Indeed, it was not that (tabernacle) made of goat skins, and curtains of fine linen, purple, hyacinth, and scarlet: Nor that which was captured by the Philistines: Nor that which was to be built by the son: But the Father's tabernacle, which, divided into many mansions, is
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] named in the plural by Christ saying: Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of iniquity, that when you shall fail, they may receive you into everlasting tabernacles. And by the Royal prophet in a psalm: How lovely are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! My soul longs and faints for the courts of the Lord. This tabernacle, therefore, not made by hand, is heaven, which was made not by the hand of men, but by the power and command of God. There is also another tabernacle, in which God delights to dwell, which is called the temple of God by Paul saying: The temple of God, which you are. Therefore, the soul of each one, cleansed and purified, is the temple and tabernacle of God: And this not made by hand,

--- Page 604 ---
TOMVS TERTIVS. 232

& not of this creation or making, by which, namely, all these material things were made, but in a singular way, breathed into by the mouth of God. Thirdly, because the legal high priest entered into the holy places with the blood of goats, calves, rams, lambs, sparrows, and doves, or with the sprinkled ashes of a heifer, and such like: All these are animals, and pertain to cleansing the animal man: But Christ entered into the holy places through his own blood, so that he might cleanse all things so much better, inasmuch as the blood, I will not say of a man, but of the most holy Son of God, is more precious than the blood of animals, by which the animal man was cleansed: And consequently, so much more perfect is the priesthood of Christ cleansing in his own blood, than the legal priesthood cleansing in the blood of animals. But why almost all things (as the Apostle says) are cleansed in blood (he says "almost", because vessels of metals were purified by fire, and other vessels and garments were cleansed by water, as we read in the book of Numbers), I believe this is the reason: because sin draws its origin from blood and flesh, therefore expiation had to be made by blood: For the tribunal of God's justice, seeking punishment where sin was, wills that blood be shed, and the flesh, which were the fuel of sin, be suppressed: But in the legal and figurative sacrifice, which did not fully expiate, purifications were made in the figurative blood of animals. But Christ, coming, promising, and giving heavenly things, having become the head of all members of this mystical body, shed blood not human and subject to sin, and not of animals, but also most precious above all bloods that were in this mystical body, for the expiation of all. Hence our
[Marginal note: Paulus] Paul says: It was necessary that the copies of the heavenly things should be purified with those sacrifices of animals: but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these, that is, with the blood of the Redeemer, as
[Marginal note: Ioan.] John says in his epistle: The blood of Jesus Christ cleansed us from all sin: And
[Marginal note: Apocal.] in the Apocalypse: Who loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood: And now it is known to all that Christ, suffering, not in the figurative blood of animals, but in his own blood, satisfied the tribunal of divine justice.

Fourthly, because the legal priests, as often as they wished to obtain propitiation for sins recurring to them, entered into the holy places and sacrificed animals: But our High Priest Christ entered into the holy places once: because he ascended the cross once, offering himself to God the Father, and making satisfaction for all, not with a figurative, but with a true satisfaction, even for the preceding fathers: Because this offering to be made was already accepted by the Father before the foundation of the world, and in it were expiated as many as were saved: as
[Marginal note: Ioan.] John expressly says in the Apocalypse: All worshipped the beast, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb, who was slain from the origin of the world. And
[Marginal note: Petrus] Peter: You were not redeemed with corruptible gold and silver from your vain conversation of paternal tradition, but with the precious blood, as of an immaculate and unblemished lamb, Christ, indeed foreknown before the foundation of the world, but manifested in the last times. By which words, beyond all ambiguity, is declared the sacrifice of this High Priest not-

--- Page 605 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...is declared the sacrifice of this High Priest of ours, Jesus, made of himself, was preordained from eternity, so that by it
even the Hebrew people might be cleansed from defilements, from which they could not be cleansed by animal sacrifices.

Fifthly, in that which he says: "Eternal redemption found:" Which words can have a double meaning: One is, that we are redeemed from sin and led to eternal glory: The other, that our High Priest Jesus found a redemption, which is unique and eternal, so much so that we do not need another, just as those Fathers of the old law needed, who were awaiting this redemption.

And meanwhile, they made several redemptions: For they redeemed the firstborn for a certain price: For they redeemed the firstborn of an ass with a sheep, and sold possessions, and liberty in the year of jubilee. But also the whole people themselves were redeemed from Egyptian servitude, only to be enslaved again: And they were redeemed many times, sometimes generally, sometimes particularly, now from one, now from another servi-[tude].

--- Page 606 ---
**THIRD TONE.**

it cannot be understood, since it did not bind all, nor did it silence the mouths of all; for it had been given only to the Israelites. And it did not justify, except from sins committed through error and other even few ones, which were secret and were not punishable by death. But crimes, rebellions, and iniquities, which are more severe sins, were not remitted in the law neither through sacrifices nor through the prayer of the priest, but were expiated by their own death, as is clear concerning the blasphemer, the murderer, the adulterer, one having intercourse with beasts, and against nature. All of whom were ordered to be stoned or burned, as we read in various places of the legal books. Therefore the Apostle says to the Hebrews: [Paul] It is impossible for sins to be taken away by the blood of bulls and goats. Therefore, our High Priest and the Son of the living God, entering the world, says: "Sacrifice and offering you did not desire, but a body you have prepared for me, in which, namely..."

--- Page 607 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

Adonijah, however, immediately after his death, by Solomon's command, was put to death. But this our High Priest purged all crimes and bore all sins through the sacrifice which he bore: as had been foretold by the beautiful oracle of Isaiah: והוא מחולל מפשעינו מרוכא מעונותינו. "And he was weakened because of our impieties, and crushed because of our iniquities:" Which impiety and iniquity, called in Hebrew עון hauon, and פשע paſſah, were not remitted by legal sacrifice: Therefore, the most merciful Father placed all these things upon the shoulders of His Son, who, offering Himself as a sacrifice, would take away all things. And because not all wish to obtain the benefit of this expiation, therefore it follows: "And he bore the sins of many," namely, of those who wish to be saved: "And he prayed for the transgressors," doing what is in Him for all: If they do not obtain salvation, let it be imputed to them: because they do not wish to embrace it, though acquired for them.

Christ was the true victim, and every kind of sacrifice, and offering. Chapter XII.

[Decorative initial O] ffered therefore for us, he became a true victim, a burnt offering, a sacrifice, a sin offering, a guilt offering, a *cherbona* of peace offerings, that is, an oblation, a gift, and whatever was offered in the Law. For a *hostia* and a *victima* is that which is offered (as the authors of our language teach) when one attacks enemies or reports a victory or triumph over them: as the most skilled
[Marginal note: Ovid.] Poet in such matters sings: "The victim that fell by the conquering right hand is called a *victima*: from conquered enemies, it has the name *hostia*." Therefore, Christ, having attacked the enemy of the human race, offered Himself to the Father as a living *hostia*, and, conquering and subduing him, sacrificed Himself as a *victima*, so that He might at once report victory and offer Himself as a *hostia* from the subdued enemies:
[Marginal note: Paul] Therefore Paul says to the Ephesians: "Christ loved us and gave Himself up for us as an offering and a sacrifice to God for a fragrant aroma, so that He might rescue us from their hands, the enemies having been subdued."
[Marginal note: The same] And again he says to the Hebrews: "But now once at the consummation of the ages, he has appeared for the destruction of sin by his sacrifice."
[Marginal note: Origen.] Concerning which sacrifice Origen discusses many things in his epistle to the Romans. Christ was also a burnt offering (*holocaustum*), which among the Latins signifies "wholly consumed by fire": but in Hebrew it is called עולה habolah, which properly interpreted means "ascending": For he was wholly consumed by the fire of love, and consumed, and transformed into a spiritual nature. Hence, demonstrating what he was to be like, he was transfigured before them, his passible, obscure, and heavy body changed into an agile, luminous, and impassible body: But it did not remain so, because he was not yet truly consumed and transformed, having been offered as a burnt offering: But after the burnt offering was made on the cross, raising himself, he showed himself (as he was) completely transformed, entering through closed doors, appearing when he wished, and concealing himself at will: and finally, having become most light, he ascended gloriously in the sight of many: From which he was appropriately called עולה holah, that is, "ascending." Therefore, consumed, and by the power of divine fire transformed into the nature of fire itself, and spirit—

--- Page 608 ---
TONVS TERTIVS. 234

changed, he ascended to the Father, having first given the disciples faith concerning the truth of his resurrection for forty days: And ascending on high, he wished to take very many with him, according to that of the prophet: "Ascending on high, he led captivity captive." [Marginal note: David]

There was also a sacrifice offered for sin, which the Hebrews call חטאת (hatat), and properly interpreting, we can say nothing more fitting than 'peccatarium' (sin-offering) from חטאת (hata), which is 'sin': Concerning which sacrifice, Paul says to the Corinthians: [Marginal note: Paul] "He who knew no sin, made himself a sin-offering for us": for which faulty codices have, "he made sin for us": For how could he who knew no sin, make sin? And what fruit would he have brought us by making sin? Nor does that explanation given by some please: "he made sin", that is, "he offered himself for sin": because even if they agree in meaning, nevertheless that interpretation cannot be fitting.

Therefore, it was a 'peccatarium' (sin-offering), that is, offered for the sins of all. There was also a 'culpatarium' (guilt-offering), namely a sacrifice offered for guilt, or for error, to speak properly: Which sacrifice in the law is called אשם (asham): which we have translated as 'for trespass': In which, by the priest, or the anointed one sinning, and by the multitude, a calf was offered; but by the prince, a male goat: But a common person offered a female goat, or a sheep, as we read in Leviticus: [Marginal note: Leviticus] And with blood, partly sprinkled on the horn of the altar by the priest's finger, partly poured out at its base: All these things are full of mysteries: For by the calf, the male goat, and the female goat, the tribunal of divine justice was appeased, to which all those things correspond: which also signify that part in man in which is the fuel of sin, so that not without cause those who are to receive judgment and God's punitive justice are compared by the Savior to goats, who are of the caprine and hircine kind: Through which slain and sacrificed animals, God was easily appeased, with error being partly excused: And the horn of the altar, erected before that very tribunal, was sprinkled with the blood of the offered animal itself to appease the heavenly powers, which demand blood from those who sin according to the flesh and blood, so that according to the rectitude of justice, each one might be punished by those things through which he also sinned. And this was done by the finger of the priest, who intervened as a mediator to appease God with sinful man.

But Christ, having become not only Priest and High Priest, but also a male goat, a calf, a sheep, a lamb, and every kind of sacrifice, as we shall immediately declare, himself pouring out his own blood on every horn of the altar of the cross, more amply and perfectly appeased the Eternal Father and the tribunal of his justice, than was done by the blood of animals.

Nor is the blood that was poured out at the base of the altar, in much greater quantity than that with which the horn of the altar was sprinkled, devoid of mystery: because much more is the blood and merit acquired through the shed blood, which superabounds and is reserved, than that blood or merit applied to the horn of the altar by the finger of the true priest for the purification of the sinner: For the blood of Christ and his merit would have sufficed, and suffices, for thousands and tens of thousands of worlds, as our Theologians say. Therefore, the part that superabounds and is reserved is greater than that which is applied for our actual purification. But this also must be noted, GG ij

--- Page 609 ---
**CANTICLE TWO**

that this part, by which we are purified, is sprinkled by the finger of the priest: because the merits of Chri-
[Marginal note: Acts of the Apostles] st are dispensed to us through the hands of the priest, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles:
"But through the hands of the Apostles many signs and wonders were done," power having been given to them, namely,
[Marginal note: Paul] through the blood and merit of Christ. Hence Paul to Timothy: "I remind you to rekindle the grace of God, which is in you through the laying on
[Marginal note: The same, Acts of the Apostles] of my hands." And in the former epistle to the same: "Do not neglect the grace, which was given to you through the laying on of the hands of the presbyter." And again in the Acts of the Apostles
it is said: "Then they laid hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit." All these things are said to denote that the merits and gifts of Christ are dispensed through the hands of priests and their ministers, abundantly and openly, just as the figurative blood was sparingly sprinkled by the sole finger of the legal priest. But that the calf, goat, she-goat, or sheep offered for sin figured Christ, we have from

--- Page 610 ---
**Previous page text for continuity:**
SONG TWO

that this part, by which we are cleansed, is sprinkled by the priest's finger: because the merits of Christ
[Marginal note: Acts of the Apostles] are dispensed to us by the hands of the priest, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles: "But by the hands of the Apostles many signs and wonders were done," power having been given to them
[Marginal note: Paul] through the blood and merit of Christ. Hence Paul to Timothy: "I admonish you to rekindle the grace of God, which is in you through the imposition
[Marginal note: Ibid. Acts of the Apostles] of my hands:" And in the former epistle to the same: "Do not neglect the grace, which was
given to you through the imposition of the hands of the presbyter." And again in the Acts of the Apostles
it is said: "Then they laid hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit:" All these things are said to denote that the merits and gifts of Christ are dis-
pensed by the hands of priests and their ministers, abundantly and openly,
just as the figurative blood was sparingly sprinkled by the mere finger of the legal priest. But that the calf, goat, kid, or sheep offered for sin prefigured Christ, we have from

---

**THIRD TONE. 235.**

He gave all, all things, as the Apostle interjects, saying: "How will he not also, with him, give us all things?" And since we have nothing that we have not received, it is right that we also return thank-offerings, distributing these small and humble earthly goods to his suffering and needy members: but let us give heart, and soul, and love to him who gave us all things, especially as he himself proclaims: "Give, and it will be given to you: Give one of earthly things, and I will give a hundred of heavenly things [Marginal note: CHRIST]: Give yourselves to me, vile and servants: and I will give you myself, the Lord."

How Christ Was the True Lamb. Chapter XIII.

[Decorated initial P] The first of the sacrifices that the children of Israel slaughtered was a lamb, which by God's command they prepared for the Passover, that is, for celebrating the passage from Egypt: Its preparation was this, as we read in Exodus [Marginal note: Exodus]: "This month of March, which the Hebrews call Nisan (ניסן), will be for you the first in the months of the year." Indeed, rightly the first, since in it...

--- Page 611 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

who is said to be placed on the left, just as the lamb on the right: whence it is implied that Christ, figured by those two animals, holds the middle, participating from both sides, reigning in the house of Jacob in the midst of Abraham and Isaac: In which was fulfilled that [marginal note: David] Davidic oracle: Mercy and truth have met each other; justice and peace have kissed: For justice and truth are placed with the kid on the left side of the Archetype; but mercy and peace with the lamb on the right: and the mediator Christ Jesus holds the middle place. The lamb is also commanded to be kept until the evening of the fourteenth day, on which it was to be sacrificed when the fifteenth day and the full moon arrived; for the month began from the new moon. But why was the Moon awaited in those things which signified Christ, and the Lord, who is subject neither to the Moon nor to the Sun, nor to the stars, but as the maker of all, commands all? We say that the full moon was not awaited

--- Page 612 ---
TONE THREE. 238

they were eating the Lamb. But the house in which we eat is the church of Christ:
the door is Christ himself, who says: I am the door. Into which entrance is not given except by [Margin: CHRI]
the doorposts of the threshold, and the lintel blood of Christ himself, the true lamb: because through his [Margin: STVS.]
blood entrance is given (says Paul) to Zion, and to the holy city, [Margin: Paulus]
and to all salvation. And then they shall eat the flesh roasted with fire that night. To us also
it was commanded under threat of denial of eternal life, that we should eat the flesh
of this lamb, who took away the sins of the world: Unless (he says) you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, [Margin: CHRI]
you will not have life in you. But we eat it roasted with fire, by that very fire, [Margin: STVS.]
of which it is said: I have come to cast fire upon the earth. And unleavened bread with wild
lettuce: Nor does God so weigh leaven, as to command the soul to be cut off
from the people, who does not eat unleavened bread, and has even a little leaven
in the house, but because of what leaven signifies, he forbade it with such a great threat:
For leaven signifies malice, which even in its smallest form is not admitted in those
who are truly about to

--- Page 613 ---
OF THE SECOND CANTICLE

It shall be eaten in one house, that is, in one church, and in one faith: For the flesh must not be brought forth, and exposed indiscriminately to unbelievers. Nor shall you break a bone of it.
[Marginal note: John.]
Which John interprets literally concerning the true crucified Lamb, saying: But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was already dead, they did not break his legs, so that the scripture might be fulfilled, which says: You shall not break a bone of him. But if we wish to refer it to the mystical body, this indeed signifies that none of those elect members, denoted by the bones, ought to be broken, according to that which the true Lamb said:
[Marginal note: CHRIST]
All whom you have given me, I have lost none of them. But if they are broken, like the son of perdition, they were not of his bones, nor of his sheep: For his bones remained whole: and concerning the sheep he says: My sheep hear my voice, and I know them: and they follow me, and I give them eternal life: and they shall never perish, and no one shall snatch them out of my hand. Afterwards, handing down the manner of eating, he says: But thus shall you eat it. You shall gird your loins, holding staffs in your hands, and you shall eat in haste: for it is *phasce*, that is, the Passover of the Lord. By these words we are taught that first we must suppress all carnal pleasure, which flourishes especially in the loins, if we wish to eat properly the food by which we may be transformed into a spiritual nature. Afterwards, that we may have our feet of affections shod, which Christ also wished to be washed, before that lamb was eaten. Moreover, we must hold in our hands, that is, in our works, the staff of the cross, so that deservedly in it we may make our works pleasing to God: And we must eat in haste: because cursed
[Marginal note: Jerem.]
is the man who does the work of God negligently, says Jeremiah. But most especially we must be shaken off from negligence in this work, in which the whole sum of our business is concluded, namely, that transformed into a better state we may live for God, whence it follows: For it is *phasce*, that is, the Passover of the Lord, from Egyptian servitude to the kingdom: from darkness to the vision of peace: from distress to joyful regions, from straw, mud, and brick, to manna, the law, and the wisdom of divine things: from a bestial life to a divine one. Hence it follows: And I will pass through Egypt that night: and I will strike every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from man to beast: and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgments: I am the Lord. The firstborn to be killed in this Passover is he, of
[Marginal note: Paul]
whom Paul says: First that which is natural, then that which is spiritual: For Esau was born first, whom he hated, afterwards Jacob, whom he loved. Therefore, the animal man, and the Egyptian, who oppresses the spiritual, must be killed, if we wish to make a true Passover
[Marginal note: Idem]
and live a better life: according to that of the Apostle to the Colossians: Mortify your members: for when you are dead, your life will be with Christ. And more clearly with the Romans he says this, knowing, that our old man was crucified with him, so that the body of sin might be destroyed, and we might no longer serve sin: For he who is dead, is justified from sin: But if we are dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him. When our animal self is dead, judgment is made against all the gods of Egypt, that is, against those things which the animal man adored, as Paul continues, saying: Therefore let not sin reign in your mortal body, so that you obey its lusts—

--- Page 614 ---
TONVS TERTIVS. 237

...its lusts: But do not present your members as instruments of unrighteousness to sin: For sin will not have dominion over you: Or do you not know that to whom you present yourselves as servants to obey, you are servants of him whom you obey? Therefore, the gods of those serving sin are either the belly, according to that saying of Paul: "Whose God is their belly": Or avarice, which is idolatry: [Marginal note: Paulus] Or the devil, whom those serving sin obey: All these things God will judge, as the Apostle says: "Food for the belly, and the belly for food, and God will destroy both it and them together with their instigator." And such is the difference between those serving God and those serving sin, as was between the children of Israel and the Egyptians: because, namely, their houses were smeared with the blood of the lamb: For the servants, indeed friends of God, and those who are justified from sin, ought to have their doorposts smeared with the blood of the Lamb, who takes away the sins of the world: by which they may deserve protection from the striking angel, grace for good works, and entrance to the heavenly kingdom: But those serving sin, deprived of that blood, the true protection of all, are killed by the striking angel, since he does not see in them the pledge of reconciliation: therefore they feel both their firstborn and all their strength crushed, and finally themselves suffocated in the sea, and utterly destroyed.

On the rod of Moses, and the cross. Chapter 14.

[Decorative initial V containing two figures] Beyond the typical lamb, in that passage of the Israelite people, there was present the sacramental rod, first very prodigious in the sight of Pharaoh, then very remarkable in all the miracles performed in the sea, the desert, and all places, until the people entered the land of promise: Which rod, although it was called Moses', was nevertheless, beyond all doubt, the power of God: upon which Moses was sustained, trusting in no power of his own. And among other things, this remarkable wonder was performed under the auspices of that rod, that when thrown on the ground, it turned into a serpent: When its tail was grasped by the one who threw it, it again appeared as a rod: From which we are taught that when the power of God is cast aside, one does not act except by the favor of the serpent, who, as the author of deceptions, very easily substitutes himself for the rod, favoring deceptions, since he cannot concur with true miracles. To the outcome of these deceptions, which is always evil, the wise person ought to look, so that, despising them and their author, he may adhere to the true worker, God: Therefore, Moses was commanded to grasp it by the tail, that is, to attend to the end and outcome of poisonous and deadly deceptions, and, driving them away, to rely solely on God: Which also indicate the removal of shoes from the feet, and the pasturing of flocks after the desert: For God had commanded him to remove the shoes from the feet of his affections, which he had shod with Egyptian doctrines: because the place and land, or state, to which he had come, was holy. For he no longer tarried in a desert place devoid of divine influences, but after the desert of magic and Egyptian art: For which we have it wrong; "to the inner parts of the desert": For he was not then dwelling in the inner recesses of the desert, but after the desert itself, namely in fertile Arabia, on Mount Sinai, irrigated by much divine influence: For on the summit of that mountain, which is called Horeb, God spoke intimately with Elijah: And on another peak of the same mountain, named Sinai, Moses...

--- Page 615 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

if he gave the law, dealing with him most familiarly, and showing many wonders, so that it was not a desert, but a most irrigated place. Which rod, moreover, of divine power, when cast before Pharaoh, appeared as a serpent, especially to him and his wise men accustomed to magical arts: who performed all their illusions by the power of the ancient serpent. Hence, believing that Moses' power proceeded from the ancient serpent itself, they opposed him with forces which they had truly received from the evil serpent, and these were turned into serpents: But Moses' rod, that is, true divine power, although it appeared as a serpent, devoured those rods and necromantic powers: so that it might be indicated that the rod, that is, divine power, which overcomes all demonic force, performed miracles in Egypt, the Red Sea, and the desert. More fortunately, however, the true and universal redeemer Christ performed sublimer and more excellent wonders with the rod of the cross than the legislator Moses: since this power of Christ was not only a rod content with a single extension, but also, passing transversely, formed a strong and ample texture, as it were, from warp and weft. For the rod of Jacob and Moses was erected only upwards, but this rod of Christ was extended in every direction, in length, breadth, height, and depth: Therefore, it prevailed not only for the liberation of the single Israelite people, but for the whole human race and the aerial powers, conquering the latter and sustaining the former, so that nothing [marginal note: Paul] remained over which its power did not prevail. And of this the Apostle speaks, saying: "That you may be able to comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth, and length, and height, and depth," namely, of the supereminent knowledge of the charity and power of Christ affixed to the cross: Whose extension and intensity are indicated by the branches and their angles: For the branches are extended upwards, and downwards, and transversely, so that, stretched out into diverse and all parts of the world, they may signify that power diffused everywhere. Sixteen angles, namely four at each end of the shaft, indicate how intense its power is: For sixteen is the first number increased from the first growing twelve, and by which (as we said above) all growing things are distributed. But it must also be observed that one quaternary (group of four) is hidden in the earth, with the shaft fixed in the earth itself, or in stone: and twelve open angles appear in the three spreading branches: Which number twelve, arising through three led by four, or through four multiplied by three, of which the former (three) is divine and the latter (four) is elemental, expressly indicates that all divine and earthly things are reconciled in the cross itself, since in the twelve one is led by the other, and both are connected in it. And this is what the Apostle [marginal note: Paul] says: "It pleased [namely, the Father] that all fullness should dwell in him, and through him to reconcile all things, making peace by the blood of his cross, whether things on earth or things in heaven." Thus also in heaven, by this divided twelve, spiritual and corporeal things are reconciled, with intelligences assisting there, flowing through those twelve corporeal signs. The hidden quaternary of increase, however, signifies the fruit of the cross itself, hidden from our senses and judgments, but nevertheless that which is the root and foun-

--- Page 616 ---
TONVS TERTIVS.                                                                    238

...dation of all fruits and merits, just as the quaternary is the root of all
numbers. That duodenary also, is led by another no small mystery, namely, from
the four heads of the cross itself, three nails, and five wounds of him
suffering in it: Where the duodenary itself results from the material quaternary, the divine
ternary, and the conglutinative quinarius: For this is denoted among the Hebrews by the letter
ה, in which they say the world was fabricated and conglutinated, and which is the seal of that
craftsman spirit, which is called *nexus*. And this cross was once seen as a serpent,
not indeed deceptive and deadly, but salutary: concerning which it is said: Just as Moses [Marginal note: CHRIST]
exalted the serpent in the desert, so must the Son of Man be exalted, on the cross:
that is, extended in the manner of a cross, so that he himself was crucified, a cross, and
a serpent, exposed not for destruction, but for salvation, whence it follows: That everyone who
believes in him may not perish, but have eternal life. For just as the flesh of a serpent
brings healing to a poisonous wound, whence theriac is made, which is an antidote to poison,
from the flesh of the *thiri*, so the flesh of Christ provides health and life to all whom [Marginal note: The same]
not Christ himself bit, but the evil serpent: Therefore, against the poisons of this [serpent], that very
flesh must be eaten by us. And because he himself seemed to himself a wounded, leprous, and
spotted serpent, therefore he began to fear, to be weary, and to be sorrowful, and finally to say:
Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me. For he was, and knew it was possible,
whence that "if" can be taken for "because" (as they say): For he greatly desired (if I am not mistaken)
another, more useful order of helping us: Nor, failing in supreme charity, did he condescend to the sensitive
part, as some suppose, since he was always ready to expose body and soul for his sheep:
But he was content to draw out a longer stay with us, so that he might perfect a more excellent work.
Hence he did not say that the cup should be removed, but that it should pass, and be deferred
until that time when he would fulfill that which the Apostle, conscious of these sacraments, says: [Marginal note: Paul]
"But last of all, the enemy, death, will be destroyed," that is, the angel of death, as he explains more clearly elsewhere, saying:
"That through death he might destroy him who had the power of death, that is, the devil:
and deliver those who through fear of death were all their lives subject to servitude."
However, the Father did not wish to acquiesce, not indeed despising the prayer of the supplicant, whom
he always heard, but so that all things might be weighed by their own weights, and distributed
at their own times and moments, which the Father himself holds in his power with a great
sacrament, so that it is not for us or the Apostles to know these things: But what he did not
perfect in the first advent, he will perfect in the second without any doubt. But to return to where
we digressed, although he felt horror from the terrifying passion and death offered,
nevertheless, grasping it by the tail, that is, looking towards the glorious end,
it again appeared as a distinguished and very famous rod: Which again appeared as a serpent
to the Pharisees and malicious ones who said: [Marginal note: Pharisees] "He casts out demons by Beelzebub, the prince of demons."
But he showed that divine power which would devour all diabolical force, proving that a demon
is cast out not by a demon, but by the finger and power of God. By which power, in many miracles in the Egypt of this world, he performed—

--- Page 617 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...performed, in granted healings, in raising the dead, by multiplied bread, water changed into wine, and countless things of this kind, not for the destruction of the Egyptians, but always for benefit and advantage. Finally, he sanctified the sea, that is, the water of baptism, through which passage is given to us to divine fellowship on Sinai, where we hear the law and feel God acting intimately, and we are fed with better bread than that dew-like (manna), which indeed descended living from heaven, offered and baked in the oven of the cross. By which, finally, our teacher Christ introduced us into the true promised land, flowing with true milk and honey. Which Moses could not do, for he could not introduce the people to the figurative land with that rod, which he had misused by striking where and when he ought not. Therefore, we must rely more happily on the rod of the cross and Christ, than on Moses and Jacob, because relying on them, we will either fail on the way, or arrive only at a shadowy land, but supported by this, we will reach the land and the true dwellings of the living, following the leader who cannot err.
[Marginal note: Jacob]
Hence, when Jacob uttered his last words, by which he summarily foretold almost all the affairs of both the figurative and the true family, he no longer leaned on his staff, with which he crossed the Jordan, but leaned on this better rod, in whose power he foresaw all those things to be accomplished. For it is said in the text: "And he gathered his feet," that is, his affections, אל המטה (El hamitah): Which, although we have it well translated as "to the bed," can also be understood as "to the rod," for המטה (hamitah) signifies both "rod" and "bed" by changing the vowel points. Therefore, in the literal sense, "to the bed," but in the allegorical sense, it is more aptly transferred to the rod, which is the cross, whose power he foresaw no less than some of the ancients who venerated the sign of the cross before Christ, as men of no small authority write. Which was either by nature, or by the dictation of the spirit, or by wiser men more intelligently teaching what they did not know, how great things were to be done through the cross.

To what end sacrifices, and why chosen goats were commanded to be offered for sin. Chapter XV.

[Large decorative initial C containing a figure of a man] WHEN God came to institute sacrifices, he commanded many things to be offered for diverse and various expiations. Which indeed at first glance seems harsh and strange, namely, that God delights in the spilled blood of animals, in roasted or burned flesh, and in the aromas of these and other things, as it is said in many places: "And the Lord smelled a sweet savor." Therefore, these are held among the greatest sacraments. For some explanation of which, it must be firmly held that the supreme God is delighted by no odors, no flavors, nor is he fed by material foods from the flesh of animals, or by prepared breads, and smeared with oil, or drenched with some fat, although all these things were commanded to be done in the law. And this, either as a sacrament of those things which truly ought to be done by Christ, and of those things which consequently are to be performed by us, namely, by mortifying, according to the apostolic precept,
[Marginal note: Paul]
our members, and by offering as an acceptable sacrifice those things which are in us, of which

--- Page 618 ---
...of which is mammon.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp

--- Page 619 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

by sacrificing our animal, which is the most powerful seat of the adversary himself, so that when it is sanctified and cleansed, he may not find entry into it, satisfaction having been made to the tribunal of divine justice, and that animal itself having been sanctified, so that it may no longer be of the devil, but of God, and that which was conducive to itching, pleasure, or corruption, and completely torn out by us, having been left to the devil.
[Marginal note: Leviticus]
Which we read as prefigured with great mystery in Leviticus, where God commanded that two goats be chosen, and that a lot having been cast upon them, one should be sacrificed to God, but the other should be sent away into the desert to Azazel, the prince of all deserters. This goat, he-goat, or buck destined for Azazel is called "emissarius" in our translation, not indeed because it is given like a horse for impregnating females, but perhaps, although less appropriately, it is called emissarius because it was sent out. And this goat, before it was sent into the wilderness, was placed alive before the Lord, so that prayers first having been poured out over it, it might be sent into solitude to the accuser of the human race, so that the mouth of the accuser himself might be shut.

And so that we may reveal something of the sacrament enclosed here, that animal which was sent is called שעיר sabir in the Hebrew idiom, which means goat, kid, hairy, devil

--- Page 620 ---
TONE THREE.                                                                    240

are given over to be tormented more: to each of whom it can be said, while they are offered to God: Now sin no more, lest something worse happen to you. When, therefore, a he-goat is commanded to be given for sin, it is commanded that the dross, six, and what is its own be rendered to the devil himself: so that what is God's, pure and clean, can be rendered to God. For that offering was figurative, just like the others. Or let us say that for the goat-like nature, which is ill-governed within us, and which is commanded to be fed in the Song of Songs, not without reason, near the shepherds' [Marginal note: Cantic.]
tents, a he-goat is given, not indeed justifying, because (as Paul testifies) no one [Marginal note: Paulus]
is justified by the works of the law, but for a certain figurative expiation, to stop the mouth of him who accuses us before God, until He should come who, by offering true expiation, would utterly cast out our accuser, as John says in the Apocalypse: [Marginal note: Ioan.]
Now salvation and strength and the kingdom of our God and the power of His Christ have come, for the accuser of our brothers has been cast down, who accused them before the sight of our God day and night. Therefore, all things that agree with him in deed and name must be left to the devil, namely, evil thought, baseness, whatever is hairy and shaggy in us: all of which are called *sahir*, just like the devil, and the animal that was commanded to be offered for this kind of expiation. If, however, we wish (as we ought) to refer these things to Christ, who is the treasury, bond, power, and truth of all sacrifices, we certainly can: For in Him was divinity, which neither sacrificed nor was sacrificed: There was also humanity resulting from two things, namely soul and body, or from the animal and the spiritual: And both of these were offered for sin, as is said of those two he-goats: For the soul was offered to God for the sins of the people, according to that of Isaiah: "If he makes his soul an offering for sin." [Marginal note: Isaias]
He certainly laid it down, as He Himself testifies, saying: "I lay down my life for [Marginal note: CHRI]
my sheep." The body, too, was offered and delivered to the will, I will not say of the devil, [Marginal note: STVS.]
but of his members, as Luke says: "But he delivered Jesus to their will," [Marginal note: Lucas.]
namely, as to the body to be crucified. And just as he who carried the he-goat into the desert, and delivered it to the power of the desert, on returning washed his clothes, so Pilate, bearing a certain likeness of him, when he had delivered Jesus to the power of darkness, washed his hands. Or let the he-goat be that which Jesus Himself delivered to be crucified, crushed, and put to death, placing upon it, at the Father's command, the iniquities of all of us, which it would carry into solitude, as is said of the figurative he-goat. For that place of Calvary, to which Jesus was led, was solitary: because there, hanging on the cross, He who was accustomed to receive the fullest graces to be communicated to us for all, was then so deserted that He cried out to the Father, who is the refuge of all, and for all always the most open fount: "Why have you forsaken me?" By which offering exhibited by Christ, and satisfaction made for all, He utterly removed all those figurative offerings, and having expelled and cast out every unclean power and authority, and having called and drawn to Himself, exalted from the earth, every clean power, He left nothing to which a he-goat, or any animal, or any offering whatsoever was due, except that which from Himself

--- Page 621 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

He made it, who was priest and victim, Christ Jesus, to God the eternal Father: Which he also commanded us to remember in his memory, although it was made once for the fullest remission of all sins: And this revocation of the offering, which was made to Azazel, or to any power of this kind, Moses (at God's command) [Marginal note: Moses.] foretold after thirty-three texts, in the manner of the Hebrews, which they call *passuchim*, hinting that after thirty-three years of the Messiah's life, this revocation ought to take place: For he says: "And they shall no longer sacrifice the sacrifice of Saharim, after whom they have prostituted themselves," having indeed so condescended to them, and become liable, that they owed something to them, until the fullest deliverer should come. It follows: "And this shall be an everlasting statute for generation and generation," never, that is, to be re [Marginal note: CHRIST] voked, just as the deliverer said, when he instituted that new sacrifice: "This cup is the new and eternal testament in my blood:" Eternal, he says, because beyond it no other shall be given, as the wise explain. It follows: "And to them, that is, to the people, you shall say: Whoever of the house of Israel, or of the sojourner in its midst, who offers a burnt offering, or a sacrifice, and does not bring it to the door of the tabernacle of testimony, to offer it to the Lord, that man shall be cut off from his people." Therefore, freed from the servitude of the devil, let us devote ourselves to God alone, offering our prayers, and sacrifices, and all our oblations to that door of testimony, who said: [Marginal note: John, same] "I am the door; if anyone enters through me, he will be saved." And he is the door of testimony, since he himself is (as John says) the faithful witness: For to this door we offer prayers and oblations, when we speak to the Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord, as through the means by which we are introduced, and obtain whatever we ask. And because it is said that the Lord smelled those sacrifices as a sweet savor, as if offered to him, and as if he delighted in the smell of crude things, we say, for some satisfaction, that all those sacrifices were offered primarily to the honor of God, although a portion was given to various powers, as necessity required: And the Lord himself smelled, not indeed those crude smokes, but delighted in the sweetness resulting from the order by which it was distributed to each, as was fitting.

Why a pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons, were commanded to be offered for the purification of childbirth, and of a woman giving birth. Chapter XVI.

[Decorative initial 'I'] Ndeed, regarding the purification of childbirth, why by divine precept a pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons, were offered, it is beautiful to investigate: For this (as I have learned from the wiser ones) is the reason, because even if marriage was instituted by God, nevertheless, with the greatest difficulty, due to the fall of human nature, it is exercised without fault: Which happens when spouses cohabit, so that they may generate offspring to the honor of God, and the increase of the human race: But this happens very rarely, with each one yielding to concupiscence, and lust, and the fulfillment of desire, and consequently to the infecting devil through these means, through which uncleanness is contracted. Therefore, for expelling this, and for purifying oneself—

--- Page 622 ---
**VOLUME THREE. 241**

the offspring conceived from two parents, namely, father and mother, both infected, a pair of turtledoves is offered—which are most faithful spouses and rejoice in great harmony—or two young pigeons, birds themselves most simple and replete with all harmony, and harming no one, especially the young, which are commanded to be offered. And they are endowed with such purity that the Savior, the wisdom of God, indicated the cleanness and simplicity which He requires from us through the simplicity of these animals, as if He had nothing simpler, saying: "Be simple as doves." And in the Song of Songs, the purest bride is compared to a dove by the bridegroom, who says: "My love, my dove, my beautiful one." Which also flies with such simplicity and straightness that the prophet desires to be carried on its wings to God, saying: "Who will give me wings like a dove: and I will fly away, and be at rest?" And what is greater, the Holy Spirit willed to be likened to no animal, except only to the dove, as we read in Matthew: "And behold, the heavens were opened, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and coming upon Him." And the Baptist, in John the Evangelist, says: "I saw the Spirit descending, and it remained upon Him." For it descended as a dove, which with fixed and great impetus flies downwards; or in the form of a dove, as some say, supported by the words of Luke, who says: "The heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit descended in bodily form, like a dove, upon Him." But it is not yet concluded that it was in the form of a dove, since a dove descending upon a man does not enter into him. It seems therefore that that comparison is rather to the flight, or property, than to the form. Or if it is insisted that it also depicted a dove in figure, we will say that that figure, although corporeal, was nevertheless not dense, but subtle: so that nothing would hinder its entry into man, just as a breath, or fire, descended and entered into the Apostles. Therefore, He who purifies all was compared to the simplest and purest dove, as it is said in the Acts of the Apostles: "God sent them the Holy Spirit, that He might purify their hearts by faith." This animal, therefore, being suitable with the purifying Holy Spirit, is appropriately offered for the purification of childbirth, symbolizing the purification to be performed by the power of the Holy Spirit Himself, who is called the purifier of all sins. And because the turtledove and the pigeon agree in the same purity, therefore either of them is commanded to be offered indifferently by the poor, who do not have the means to offer a lamb—which, filled with the same purity as those birds, was offered by the richer, as the law commanded. Nor is it without mystery that turtledoves, already joined in most faithful marriage, are commanded to be offered, but the simpler young pigeons, because these indicate the offspring, while those indicate the parents to be purified. And because for the purification of one, the other is also purified, therefore one pair of these animals is commanded to be offered indifferently. But why this purification is indicated at the end of forty days is not without mystery: For just as in forty days the seed, having become an embryo, is nourished and transformed until it is brought into a perfect organic body with its due and harmonious measures, so that it may be disposed to receive a masculine soul, which is the chief faculty of man's reason, so for forty days
HH

[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
[Marginal note: Canti.]
[Marginal note: David]
[Marginal note: Matth.]
[Marginal note: Baptist.]
[Marginal note: Luke]
[Marginal note: Acts]

--- Page 623 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

...so for forty days the woman runs her course after giving birth, so that the female parts, disturbed in childbirth, may be adapted, before she is purified. Therefore, in a dove or a turtledove, God, through the priest (yet in a certain figure), purified the offspring and the birthing woman, so that the whole might be born holy, hinting at the true purification to be done by the High Priest Christ in the Holy Spirit, who came like a dove, to whom it pertains (as we have said) to purify humans: For when he gave us the power of purifying humans from the defilement of sin, he said: "Receive the Holy Spirit; whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them:" For God sends this spirit [Marginal note: Paul] through his Son, as Paul says: "God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, 'Abba, Father,'" indeed a sanctifying spirit, as the same Apostle says elsewhere: "Christ was predestined in power according to the spirit of sanctification:" [Marginal note: Isaiah.] According to whom, he also bestows purification and many other good things upon us, as Isaiah had previously prophesied in his person: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, he has sent me to preach the gospel to the poor, to heal the brokenhearted, and to proclaim forgiveness to the contrite, and release to the captives, and the acceptable year of the Lord."

Why two birds were offered for cleansing a leper. Chapter XVII.
[Decorative initial C] SINCE original sin and its concupiscence were commanded to be purified by pure animals (because the most innocent child was purified along with its mother, not from malice, but from that greater concupiscence which intervened in the generation of offspring), leprosy, which indicates sin contracted by various and multiple dispositions, was commanded to be expiated by other, or common, birds: although in our translation those birds which were commanded to be offered for purifying lepers are expressed as sparrows: For צפורים Zipurim signifies birds indiscriminately, as we can understand from many places of sacred scripture, and particularly from the present text, where it is said: "Command the priest to take two live, clean zipurim," for which our translation has "from those which can be eaten:" For if Zipurim specifically meant sparrows, it would not have been necessary to add "clean," or "from those which can be eaten." [Marginal note: Origen.] Therefore, birds in general are commanded to be taken, which Origen thought were hens. But since scripture does not more clearly express what they are, admitting that they were birds in general, let us come to explain other mysteries. Two birds were commanded to be offered, one of which was sacrificed, or throttled, in an earthen vessel over living waters: The other, however, alive, with cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop, was dipped in the blood of the sacrificed sparrow, with which the one who was to be cleansed from leprosy was to be sprinkled seven times: and the live bird was released over the open field. Indeed, the two birds in the case of the leper indicate two conditions of the flesh: For a certain part of the flesh lives, but another part is so dead that if someone pricks it, the leper does not feel it. Therefore, the bird that is released alive indicates purification, or a sign of living flesh, and not fully infected. The other, however, was killed for the purification and re-vivification of that pre-dead flesh. This also happened...

--- Page 624 ---
**THIRD TONE.**
**242**

over waters, the first and chief cleansing of all impurities, and living [waters], because dead waters are commonly putrid, defiling rather than cleansing. It was, moreover, sacrificed in an earthen and clay vessel, which signifies the body, in which that volatile animal spirit infecting the flesh itself, which we call pre-dead, ought to be purged through mortification. The living bird, however, which was released into the field, signifies that stronger flesh, or spirits not yet infected, or a better soul. But ascending to the allegorical sense, the two birds indicate two pledges which that supreme purifier Christ Jesus offered for our expiation, namely, the spiritual and the animal man: And He was slain to purge our concupiscence. Moreover, He is said to have been sacrificed in an earthen vessel, because He was immolated in His body fabricated from earth: And this upon the watery virtue of mercy, the sign of which, together with blood, namely the sign of justice, came forth from His dying side. Therefore, the slain bird is the body, or its animal virtue extinguished in the vessel of its body: But the living bird is His spirit, or soul, and it too offered for our expiation, according to what He says: "And I lay down My soul for My sheep." [Marginal note: CHRIST.] But since it cannot be killed, it was released alive into that supreme field or plain, from which all things draw their origin: which is the Eternal Father, to whom, dying and releasing His spirit, He said: "Father, into Your hands I commend My spirit." [Marginal note: The Same] Moreover, He released this soul or spirit sprinkled with the blood of the sacrificed bird, and also with the blood of those for whom the bird had been sacrificed, just as He speaks through Isaiah, saying: "And their blood was sprinkled upon My garments," [Marginal note: Isaiah] Whom thus sprinkled, the angels seeing (as the divine Dionysius explains) said: [Marginal note: Dionysius. Angels] "Who is this who comes from Edom with sprinkled garments from Bozrah, that is, from the vintage, which He made, namely, from souls through the sprinkling of His own blood?" And again they said: "Why is Your garment red, like one treading in the winepress?" He answers: "I have trodden the winepress alone: because alone in His own blood He worked the salvation of the human race." That sprinkling, moreover, was done with cedar wood, figuring the true sprinkling of the cross, fabricated (as it is said) principally from cedar. Scarlet and hyssop were added: Scarlet, indeed, is a worm, which in Hebrew is called תולעת tolahat: [Marginal note: CHRIST.] That very worm, who in the psalm says אנכי תולעת anochi tolahat, that is: "I am a worm, and no man." There is added שני seni, which our translation sometimes renders as 'twice dyed,' but properly signifies 'secondary' or 'twin': Which most aptly applies to Christ, who alone had this, to rejoice in a dual nature, namely divine and human: Both of which were sprinkled with the blood of that true bird sacrificed for human salvation. But the divine nature was sprinkled in the garment of human nature: concerning which Paul says: "Found in fashion as a man." [Marginal note: Paul] Therefore the angels said: "Why is Your garment red and stained?" Hyssop, moreover, or libanotis (as we have declared elsewhere) is indeed the most excellent of all plants, as is known to the wise, and most suitable for sprinkling, as it has woody twigs with very dense and tiny leaves. Hence it was commanded -
**HH ij**

--- Page 625 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

ted that sprinklings be made, representing the true sprinkling to be done with a plant, or a shoot, the best of all shrubs: concerning which Isaiah says: "And he grew up like a shoot, or a plant before him." Therefore, the one to be cleansed was sprinkled seven times with the blood of a slain bird, [Marginal note: Isaias] a number indeed (as we have said elsewhere) most suitable for remission and expiation. Nor is it in vain that it is added in the text: "And he himself shall be clean"; because many washings for cleansing, and many medicines for healing are spent in vain. But this one was not in vain, especially in the figurative leprous human race, which without doubt was entirely cleansed by the blood of that true bird, Christ, who, just as he flew from heaven to us, so, with us purified, he flew back to heaven: John, who saw this cleanser there at the forefront of his most famous vision, says: [Marginal note: Ioan.] "Christ loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood," cleansing better and more effectively than the first man had defiled.

Why a calf or an ox was offered along with a goat for sin. Chapter XVIII.

[Large decorative initial P] For sin, however, a goat is commanded to be offered, namely the father of the kids, who will be placed on the left to be judged, so that through the offered goat, the goat-like or kid-like part which is in man may be expiated: For there is a lustful portion in man similar to a goat, or a kid, or its mother goat, which is lustful and spoils vineyards: Therefore, it must be expiated, suppressed, bound, and led into the servitude of a better portion, just as it is said of another animal [Marginal note: Cantic.] similar to this in the Canticles: "Catch us the little foxes that spoil the vineyards." Of kids also it is said in the same place: "Feed your kids beside the shepherds' tents," namely, those who in scripture are said to feed [Marginal note: CHRI STVS] sheep well: of whom the chief is he who says: "I am the good shepherd, and I lay down my life for my sheep." Therefore, such appetites, [Marginal note: Isaias] which spoil the vineyard, must be offered and chastised—that vineyard, indeed, which (as Isaiah says) is the house of Israel, [Marginal note: CHRI STV S.] and the assembly of the elect, and the inheritance of the Lord: concerning which Christ, speaking in parables, says: "Go you also into my vineyard," into which flesh and blood, and that lustful portion, cannot enter: Therefore, it was to be offered and expiated in the goat: in which there is greater and more inveterate lust than in a kid: so much so that it stinks, just like the flesh of those who are excessively lustful, and much more than the flesh of those who live chastely. Nor is the beard, which this animal offered for sin has, devoid of mystery: For the beard signifies strength, which is manifold, and sometimes good and to be preserved, and sometimes evil and to be entirely cut off. For there is [Marginal note: Orige.] the strength and virtue of the Greeks (says Origen) in wisdom acquired by human intellects: And there is the strength of the Assyrians and Chaldeans in the knowledge of the stars and in the influence to be suspected therefrom: There is also the strength and virtue of the Persians, and Æ

--- Page 626 ---
TONVS TERTIVS.
243

...the beard signifies, not indeed that of the Nazarenes, which ought never to be shaved off, nor diminished, nor destroyed, but that which signifies the strength of those who are outside the bosom of the good, and beyond the river dividing between those gathered in Abraham's bosom, and those who are buried or are to be buried in hell, as we shall be taught by the oracle of Isaiah: [Marginal note: Isaiah.] Who, when he prophesies concerning the birth of Alma and Immanuel, who will eat butter and honey, that he may thereby learn to discern between evil and good, he adds: "In that day the Lord will shave with a hired razor those who are beyond the river, in the king of the Assyrians, the head, the hair of the feet, and the entire beard." Therefore, strength and virtue, which is according to the flesh and blood, must be shaved off or offered in sacrifice: so that this being weakened or slain, the other, namely the better part, may become stronger: Which is also more clearly explained in Deuteronomy, [Marginal note: Deut.] when it is said: "If anyone wishes to take a foreign woman as wife, her hair shall be shaved, her nails shall be cut, and she shall put off the garment in which she was captured," so that, namely, all things pertaining to the strength and virtue of paganism and carnality may be denoted as needing to be laid aside by those who are to be assumed into the bosom of the elect. This goat's beard, therefore, must either be shaved and taken away from us, or offered in sacrifice with that in which the virtue itself resides.

Also, a calf, or the king of the herd (a bull), must be offered for sin, namely, the pride and arrogance of the animal man, who glories in wickedness and rejoices when he has done evil: Which two, namely wantonness and pride, proceed from two principal sources gushing forth in the lower man, namely the concupiscible and irascible parts, which by man going to God must be offered to God himself, as Origen discusses at length and eloquently on Numbers: [Marginal note: Origen.] "The Lord," he says, "led his people by the hand of Moses and Aaron, for this reason, because the hand of one alone was not sufficient: For Moses indicates the knowledge of the law, and Aaron indeed the skill of sacrificing to God and immolating: For if, going out of Egypt and converted to God, I cast off pride: I sacrifice a bull to God himself by the hand of Aaron: but a calf, if pride and haughtiness are still tender: But if I have destroyed petulance and wantonness, I will believe that I have also slain a goat to the Lord by the hand of Aaron: Which hand of Aaron in no way offers rightly, unless regulated by the law, therefore the hand of Moses is also required. Nor would the judgment of the law suffice, unless the work is perfected by the true priest, who, according to the Apostle's saying, [Marginal note: Paul] offers himself a living sacrifice, holy, pleasing to God, with reasonable service, namely, the discretion of the law. Behold, therefore, how both hands of Moses and Aaron are required, so that the chosen people may be led into the promised land and pass through the desert of this barren age: Which Christ most perfectly accomplished, according to him who had preceded as a type: For he, observing the law even to the least, the smallest jot and tittle, offered himself, the High Priest, a living sacrifice, for a calf, for a goat, and for any burnt offering: since he himself is the whole and contains all things, as we will declare more fully in its proper place. And among other things he offered the beard, namely, the strength of the lower man, utterly mortifying it in himself, who is the head of all, as in
HH iij

--- Page 627 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

CHRIST. should mortify the same in all members, according to that which he said: Unless a grain of wheat falling into the earth dies, it remains alone: but if it dies, it brings forth much fruit. And this is the mystery of Christ's death, prefigured by the death of all animals which, by the command of the law, were offered in sacrifices, so that from that death he might bestow life and all the fruits of life upon us.

What the sheep, and the lamb. Chapter XIX.

ET if by law it is commanded to offer a goat, a calf, a sheep, a lamb, a cow, sparrows, turtledoves, and suchlike, yet there is one reason for offering and another: For the purification of childbirth, a lamb, or turtledoves, or two young pigeons: For the purification of lepers, sparrows: But for sin, a calf and a goat: A red heifer indeed for the universal and immense crime of the first parents and of the adored calf: But I nowhere find sheep and lambs to be offered, except for the purification of childbirth and for bringing about peace between man and God. The reason for this mystery, however, is so sublime and elevated beyond our understanding, that we scarcely dare to speak of it. But I thought it opportune to premise this, that צאן zon signifies the whole ovine family, namely, sheep, rams, male lambs, and female lambs: כשבים chebes, or כשבים chesseb, which is the same, a very tender male lamb, or female lamb, and sometimes (always, however, with a mystery) in scripture zon is placed, and sometimes one of these two: Deferring the sacrament of this matter for now, let us premise something else, that lambs or sheep, although they will be placed on the right hand of the judge to receive blessing and life, yet their origin is from a higher place, so that not without mystery our Redeemer, who proceeded from the Father, was sometimes called a lamb, sometimes a sheep.
Of him, than whom no greater arose, he says (speaking of Christ):
Ioã. Bap. "Behold the Lamb of God, behold him who takes away the sins of the world."
Isaias. But of both, Isaiah says: "As a sheep he shall be led to slaughter, and as a lamb before its shearer." And because he took care to make us all sheep, he himself, from a sheep and a lamb, became the good shepherd, so much so that he would lay down his life for his sheep. Therefore, well is the sheep, a true type of him who made peace for all things through the blood of his cross, offered for the pacification of man with God: For no one could equally well pacify us with the highest Father, as he who is in the bosom of the Father, and proceeds from him, more expressly depicted by the sheep and the lamb, both because they harm no one, but are always beneficial with manifold benefit: and also from their intrinsic property and origin, of which it is not permitted to speak at present. Hence, not undeservedly is the sheep held in such high esteem, that very great men and most pleasing to God were shepherds of sheep, such as Abel, first in the name of justice, also adorned by the testimony of the Son of God, Abraham, Father of faith and of many nations, Jacob, Father of the chosen family, and prince, and heir of God, Moses, lawgiver, and intimate with God above all prophets, David, chosen according to the heart of the Lord, first King of the tribe of Judah, singer of the Holy Spirit, and restorer and patron of the most sacred worship:
CHRIST. And finally, he himself, the Redeemer of all and Son of the Most High God: who also declares that he came only to seek the lost sheep of Israel, and

--- Page 628 ---
**TONVS TERTIVS.** 244

chosen family: For whose deliverance from Egypt, that is, from sin that constricts and darkens, a sheep and a lamb was offered, as it were, just as that typical one was sacrificed by the command of the law. [Marginal note: CHRIST] Indeed, to explain this mystery in detail, although it may be very difficult, nevertheless, we will touch upon something by sketching it out. It is commanded in the law that each family should take a lamb to be sacrificed and entirely eaten, so much so that if one family, being small, is not sufficient for eating it, it should take a neighbor as a guest at the feast. For every family ought to take a lamb, lest any remain deprived of the favor of the true Lamb, of whom that one bore the type. It is also commanded to be eaten whole, lest anything remain to be wasted, according to that saying of the true Lamb himself: "Gather up the fragments, lest they perish," because nothing precious ought to perish through our negligence. For bread and lamb are valued at an equal price by those who know; therefore the Redeemer wished to be called specifically bread and lamb. It ought to be male, in which a nobler and stronger virtue might flourish; and a yearling, that is, perfect in the entire course of the sun, which also signifies the Redeemer making fruitful the twelve princes, whom he established over the twelve tribes of the elect, just as He in the year makes fruitful the twelve celestial signs. It also ought to be without blemish, so that it might signify divine things, which are all whole, according to that saying of the prophet: "The works of the great God are perfect." And our [Marginal note: Mofes] Lamb says: "I have made the whole man well."

It is added that a kid also be taken with the same rite, which (as we recently said) was offered for the expiation of the animal man, just as the lamb and sheep for covenanting the better man with God, so that the whole man might make a perfect transition to the true land of promise. [Marginal note: CHRIST] But while the lamb is commanded to be sacrificed on the tenth day, the kid was kept until the fourteenth, not without mystery: For when the course of life designated by the complete number ten is finished, the perfect expiation of the animal and four-elemental man is still prolonged; because with the spirit made blessed and restored to God, who gave it for a certain course of time determined by the Father, the relief of the animal man and the four-part body from corruption, and its transition into a celestial and blessed nature, is extended. Therefore, so that it may be indicated that the whole man is to pass from Egypt to the true promised homeland of the heavens, the whole man is expiated, but first the better part through the lamb, afterwards the remaining four-part through the kid, which is therefore reserved to be sacrificed after the fourth day. But the lamb is commanded to be sacrificed and eaten with greater observance and more solemn ceremonies, because more diligent care must be taken concerning the sanctification of the celestial man, to whose sanctification also follows the sanctification of the earthly (man). And so that a clear entrance may be granted to both men, it is commanded that both doorposts be stained with the blood of the sacrificed lamb, through which both men ought to enter: indeed the better man through the right, but the other through the left, just as the sheep, pacifying him, is said to be placed on the right, and the kid, expiating this one, will be placed on the left. Indeed, these are very profound mysteries, neither a word, nor the smallest jot, is empty of mystery. Moreover, both doorposts are smeared with blood, because (as the Apostle says) [Marginal note: Paul] "Almost all things are cleansed with blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no remission." Furthermore, it is provided that nothing raw should be eaten.
HH iiij

--- Page 629 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...eaten, or cooked with water, but only roasted by fire, through which also expiation occurs, as the Apostle says: "He shall be saved, yet so as by fire"; although it suffers detriment from the fire, that is, what is worse: whose part, even if cast off in dross, whatever good gold it retains is nevertheless purged and united with what is already purified and better. It is furthermore commanded that the whole lamb be eaten, which now represents the head, now the entire mystical body: Whose no member ought to be cast off or despised, but received through love, eaten, and transformed into oneself, so that the precept may be kept, by which it is said: **Lex** "You shall love your neighbor as yourself." And since the head ought to be loved and received above all members, therefore mention is first made of the head, and it is said: "You shall eat the head with the feet and the entrails:" And so that we diligently observe not to exclude anyone from our love and communion, it is commanded that nothing remain uneaten: But if anything remains, it should be given to the fire, so that it may consume it and offer it transformed to God: for if there is anyone to whom we cannot render the benefit of love and actual service, let us offer him to God, refined by fiery love and commended by prayer. Moreover, we ought to eat with unleavened bread, that is, with sincere charity: in which there is not even a little leaven of wickedness and malice, or of simulation corrupting the bread of love. And although bread thus corrupted may seem sweeter to the taste, it nevertheless contains the malice of corruption: which, like all other things, was commanded in figure to those fathers. Wild lettuces are added, as our translation has it, or endive, as others wish. But מרור *maror*, as the Hebrew letter has it, signifies a bitter or pungent taste: which prepares the appetite, just as, conversely, sweetness removes it, so that it may be eaten with feeling and appetite: which contributes to good digestion and the transformation of what is eaten into the eater: Or with bitterness and mortification of the animal man, so that the spiritual may be stronger, and

--- Page 630 ---
TONVS TERTIVS. 245

the prophet speaks concerning His coming, saying: Behold, He comes quickly, swiftly, according to that of the Royal prophet: His word runs swiftly. The angel, knowing this custom of the Lord, [Marginal note: David] who had come to free Peter from prison, said to him: Arise quickly, lest, namely, the time of favor pass by: For although the Lord, in His good- [Marginal note: CHRIST] ness, is always ready to help us and favor us, yet His Spirit breathes where and when it wills, as He Himself says in the Gospel, which is titled according to John: Which the Lord Himself, commanding, most clearly explains, saying: For it is Pascha, that is, the passing over of the Lord, for thus it is written in Hebrew פסח pascah, from the verb פסח pascah, which means 'he passed over': But He passed over, so that He might also make us pass over: But He hastens, so that He might also make us hasten to enter into the promised land, where true rest is given, concerning which the Apostle says: Let us hasten to enter into that rest. Indeed, one must hasten, [Marginal note: Paul] because there is danger in delay, as the same Apostle adds: Lest anyone [Marginal note: The Same] fall into the same example of unbelief: into which unbelief that people fell, drawing out a long delay in the desert.

Concerning the showbread, unleavened cake, wafers, similar breads, and such things anointed with oil. Chapter XX.

But since enough has been said concerning the offering of the flesh of various animals, it remains that we also briefly discuss something about breads: Which are commanded to be offered in various forms and ways, not without a profound mystery perceived by very few: Concerning which, even if it is discussed in many places, for now, however, we will explain only those things which concern the 'breads of faces' (for which we have 'showbread'), and those things which are touched upon in the seventh chapter of the book of Leviticus, which the Hebrews call 'Vayikra' in the treatise whose title among them is 'Tzav', that is, 'command': Where both a varied form of bread is described, and a manifold way of presenting it with the greatest mystery: To which all mysteries concerning breads, which are discussed elsewhere, can be reduced: For first it is commanded to take מצות חלות halot mazot, which our people have translated as 'unleavened breads'. But it was a cake, or an unleavened roll, and this kneaded with oil. Afterwards, רקיקי rechiche are required, which signify wafers: And these are commanded only to be anointed with oil. Afterwards, it is commanded to offer סולת מרבכת חלות solet murbebet halot, that is, fine flour added with a cake, and all that together kneaded and enveloped in oil: Which our translation has so intricately and confusedly, that neither the fact, nor the mystery, nor the sacrament, which is great, can be perceived: For these things, together with those which are said concerning the showbread, are most recondite secrets, and have a symbol with that unique sacrifice which our High Priest, Christ Jesus, commanded to be offered for our food and life, and in commemoration of Himself: But it is a sacrament, because through that unique bread, compacted from various grains and transformed into His body, it signifies that all of us, who are His members, must first be made into one body through charity and love, afterwards to be offered to God as a holy sacrifice, and pleasing to God Himself, so that from thence we may finally be transformed into Christ.
HH v.

--- Page 631 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

...Christ, so that we may say: I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: Who, the High Priest, as seen on earth, encompassed the whole sacrifice in flesh and bread, as if expressing above all else our body to be joined with our head, Christ, and the soul to be transformed into God; so when Israel formerly spoke to its beloved, he encompassed a figurative sacrifice in this manner, namely, in flesh and bread. And first he ordained certain breads to be placed upon a table in the ark before the face of the Lord existing there, whence it was called the bread of faces, that is, placed before the Lord: Of which it was not permitted to eat, except by priests, and by those who were clean from women, and from bodily defilement from the third day onwards, as Achimelech revealed to David, who was urgently requesting that bread, being in extreme necessity, for which reason alone it was permitted for those who were not priests to eat. Which holy bread expressly signified that bread which descended from heaven: and which is the true bread of faces, because it introduces to life, in which we shall see God.

--- Page 632 ---
TONVS TERTIVS. 246

the soul is utterly destitute, although it is in sin and full of earthly affections, yet still Christian, that is, anointed, therefore it is designated by a flat cake merely smeared with oil. But if a person strives to return to God and become His son, according to the power given to him by God, then he is again anointed with the oil of divinity and filled with the fullness of Christ, as happened to those ancient fathers, of whom it is said: "They were all filled with the Holy Spirit:" And then man returns to that state and covenant with God, in which we were when we came forth from Him: which the heavenly teacher desires us to attain: indeed, he urges us to attain it even by threatening, when he says: "Unless you become as little children, you will not enter the kingdom of heaven:" This is signified by the cake or roll, which, kneaded with oil, is commanded to be offered in the third place. But fine flour, that is, sifted flour and whiter than the rest, from which Easterners usually make very white loaves, indicates that better portion of divinity which we acquire in pure, clean, and faithful service to God, with divine grace assisting: This is signified by the five or two talents acquired beyond those originally given to the good merchant: For we ought not to be content with the talent lent, lest we be accused by him who gave it, as sluggish and ungrateful. To this cake and fine flour is further added leavened bread with a sacrifice of praise, namely, in the pacification of the offerer. This leaven is not indeed that of wickedness and malice corrupting the whole mass, but a better leaven, namely, transforming man into a strong and higher state, and into the same image, which is the Son of God, existing as the true stone, not indeed of philosophers or physicians, but heavenly and divine, who is Christ: And therefore He enters into us, to make us divine and heavenly, concerning whom Peter says: "Coming to Him as to a living stone, rejected indeed by men, [Marginal note: Petrus.] but chosen by God and honored:" Who is now our foundation, now a certain sanctifying and transforming power, therefore Peter continues: [Marginal note: Idem] "And you yourselves, as living stones, are being built up as spiritual houses," behold the first: Afterwards, concerning the second, he continues saying: "a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ," who indeed by His power transforms us into true priests and sons of God, so that we may be co-heirs of His kingdom and glory. This power and authority He conferred upon us, just as He gave Himself to be eaten: so that, having been transformed into Him, we too, though ungrateful, may become bread of heavenly divinity, kneaded with oil and leavened by His grace and power.

What is fumigation, or the censer, incense, and incensing. Chapter XXI.

[N] Or is the fumigation, which is commanded to be done in sacred rites, devoid of mystery: for it is right that God should be worshipped and the inner man nourished in all possible ways: For God is worshipped by hearing, while we fulfill Him, as much as we can, with prayers and praises. Man is nourished through the ears by the food of all words that proceed from the mouth of God, and by those [Marginal note: Dauid] internal utterances, concerning which the prophet says: "I will hear what the Lord speaks in me..."

--- Page 633 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

less God. God is worshipped with food, which we set before Him, when He Himself enters to dine with us:
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
And this food is the conversion and attraction of our souls, as He Himself testifies, speaking of the converted Samaritans with His disciples, and saying: I have other food to eat, which you do not know. And man is nourished through the mouth by that bread which descended from heaven, and by the flesh of the lamb offered for us, indeed, of Him who took away the sins of the world. God is worshipped by our knowledge and meditation: concerning which the royal Prophet
[Marginal note: Dauid]
sings: Blessed are those who search His testimonies, who seek Him with their whole heart. And again: And I will meditate on Your commandments, which I have loved. And our better eye is nourished by that light which illuminates every man coming into this world. God is worshipped by manifold fumigation, as Scripture says in many places: The Lord smelled a pleasing aroma. And the better man is nourished through the nostrils, through which that better soul was infused, which is called the breath of life, but of lives in the truth of the letter, by the same fumigation of frankincense and perfumes, which proceed from the same place from which the breath itself was infused: so that the food may be connatural with him who is fed: and he who worships may agree with the means by which he worships, and both together with Him who is worshipped: For the soul proceeds from the supreme fount of good things, and the true giver of forms
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
through Him, through whom all things were made, as He Himself testifies, saying: My Father is still working, and I am working, either by creating anew, as our Theologians say, or by infusing that which emanates from that very fount, as others assert. From the same place receive their origin and power both frankincense and such perfumes, which are commanded to be burned in the law, as the more esoteric Theologians say: For each thing, as they teach, has a particular place in the archetype, from which it draws its power and origin. Hence the Lord receives as a most sweet aroma such things, which are restored to Him by a purified soul, and now disposed to ascend together with that fumigation:
[Marginal note: Daui]
with which the divine Lyre-player wished that at least his prayer might ascend, when he sang, saying: Let my prayer be directed, O Lord, as incense in Your sight. And our soul, the offspring of God Himself, delights in such perfumes, receiving them through those nostrils, through which it also entered into the lower man: through which also sometimes are emitted most lively spirits, which cannot be retained in the heart, bile, or by excessive labor. Hence, by some, the sense of smell itself is considered more lively and spiritual than the other senses: But the frankincense, which is commanded to be burned in the law, was composed of various aromatics and gums, brought together with such art and sacredness, that God commands with a great threat, that that composition should not be turned to other uses, or burned to another than God Himself, as it is found at the end of the thirtieth chapter of the book of Exodus, where it is said: That incense, namely, shall be most holy to you: You shall by no means make it for your own uses, for it shall be holy to you for the Lord. Whoever makes such incense for sensual smell, namely, shall be cut off from his people. But what things entered into that composition, and how it was brought together, I do not yet perfectly know, although some boast about their knowledge of that composition, and of the gums, and aro-

--- Page 634 ---
TONE THREE. 247

ingredients for making that incense: For indeed I find various opinions and interpretations concerning the gums and aromatics that compose it. For **נטף** Nataph in our translation we have rendered as stacte, but others, not ignorant, assert that it is balsam, others opobalsam. **שחלת** Sachelet, which our translation has as onycha, among others is held to be ambergris. **חלבנה** Helbena, which our translator interpreted as galbanum of good odor, others assert to be mastic. Likewise, although it is said in the text that all these are taken in equal weight together with the most luminous or transparent frankincense, yet nothing is said about the method of compounding, but only that it be made by the art of the perfumer: What kind of art that is, God knows. And those fathers knew, who were accustomed to burn such perfumes to God. But for us, in whom the figure has yielded to truth, it must be most diligently cared for, instead of animal sacrifices and delicate incense, that we offer ourselves to God as a holy sacrifice, pleasing to Him, and as incense composed of various virtues, by the grace and art of our supreme perfumer, Christ Jesus, so that we may say with the Apostle: "We are the good odor of Christ." Namely, to God and to men.

Christ is the supreme truth, and the light teaching all, and illuminating all. Tone Four.

[Woodcut initial Q] What truth is. Chapter One.
Christ is truth. Chapter II.
Christ is the truth of the law. Chapter III.
How one iota or one tittle of the law will not pass away unfulfilled and unverified in Christ. Chapter IIII.
Christ perfected the law. Chapter V.
What the red heifer and its ashes mean in sacred rites and in the expiation of the defiled. Chapter VI.
How the doctrine of Christ is supremely true. Chapter VII.
What those things which Christ taught have to do with the truth of the law. Chapter VIII.
By what rectitude of truth Christ God rules the world. Chapter IX.
What Christ taught in truth concerning things to be believed. Chapter X.
That faith alone, which is pure credulity, is by no means sufficient for salvation. Chapter XI.

--- Page 635 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**
**WHAT IS TRUTH, Chapter One.**

[Marginal note: The Wise]

SO great is the splendor of truth that it overwhelms all weak eyes, and, exceeding their small power, offends them. Hence the minds of common people, and those not yet well purified, are more delighted by crude falsehood than by subtle truth; because truth is rectitude perceptible only by the mind, as the Wise define by common consent. And if it is perceived only by the mind, therefore it is not apprehended by those who in no way possess it in their mind, who neither understand those things which are of God, who is the fount of all truth: Whose proper force is the harmony and congruence of the middle with the beginning and the end.

Hence, by no small mystery, in the most ancient language (which is called holy), truth is thus described: אמת (emet). In which word the first, middle, and last letters of the alphabet, connected, come together: For א Aleph is the first, ת Tau the last, and מ Mem indeed the middle; and with their vocalizations it is pronounced 'emet'. By these letters is indicated the whole texture of things, namely, the going forth from the beginning into the thing itself, and the return to the end: And this is properly truth, and the rectitude which pertains to truth.

Moreover, to denote the firmness and stability of truth, its name is composed of letters doubly squared, namely, by figure and by numbers: For the figure of these letters is such that it has firm feet and bases, by which each of them stands separately, and all together more strongly; just as, on the contrary, the name signifying falsehood is written with letters that have no stability, nor can they stand separately, nor joined together, so that the adage is true: 'falsehood has short feet,' indeed, lame and weak. For thus that name is written שקר (sheqer), which, pronouncing in our language, we say 'secher'.

Also in numbers, all the letters from which the name of truth is composed convey a solid and firm quaternary number: For א Aleph signifies one and a thousand: Which one is the solid principle and essence of all numbers: A thousand also is the cube of the complete number ten. מ Mem, however, signifies 40, which is a number derived through the complete number ten, and through the radical quaternary number, and the solid foundation of all numbers. ת Tau, indeed, signifies 400, a number derived through ten and forty, or through four and a hundred, which is the square of ten: For ten times forty, or four times a hundred, makes 400. And thus the numbers and figures of the letters contained in the name of truth are always solid: In the letters, however, by which the name of falsehood is composed, neither the figures (as we said) nor the numbers conveyed by them contain anything of solidity; whence it is implied that falsehood easily collapses of its own accord. Moreover, it must be noted that the numbers of the letters of falsehood differ greatly from the numbers denoted by the letters of truth: For in these, one letter signifies (as we sa

--- Page 636 ---
FOURTH TONE. 248

(we said) unity and a thousand, another four tens, but the third four hundreds, indicating that truth itself apprehends and gathers divine things denoted by א aleph, celestial things by מ mem and the number forty, and terrestrial things by ת tau and the number four hundred: as is clear to those who know true formal mathematics. However, the letters from which the name of falsehood is composed, all signify hundreds, numbers indeed assigned to lower and coarser things, where falsehood and deceit thrive: For of those letters, ק coph gives one hundred, ר resh two hundred, and ש sin three hundred.

Christ is Truth. Chapter II.

[Decorative woodcut initial E]rom what has been said, it is easily understood how Christ is truth, who not only makes the middle agree with the beginning and the end, but is himself the middle, the beginning, and the end, just as He himself testifies, speaking to John in the Patmos vision, saying: I am α & ω, alpha [Marginal note: CHRIST.] & omega, the beginning and the end: For He spoke in the Greek language, just as the revelation itself was entirely written in the Greek idiom, and it is as if He had said in the Hebrew language: I am א aleph & ת tau: For of these, one is the first, and the other the last letter, just as in the Greek alphabet alpha is the first, and omega the last. Therefore, no doubt remains that Christ is the first and the last, the beginning and the end: Who again said: I am the beginning: And again: I will draw all things to myself, as it were, to the end. [Marginal note: The same] Indeed, I testified to this alone, so that the middle might also be established. Hence (as we will explain in its proper place) He was manifoldly made into the middle and a mediator. Behold then the most elegant reason why, namely, the Word of God assumed humanity, and a body, and the whole man, every kind of creature: so that, existing as the beginning, and assuming the middle, that is, man, who is intermediate between God and other creatures, containing all of them, He might lead him, and all things that are in him, to their proper end: And in this way, making the extremes and the middle agree with both, He would rightly claim the name of truth for Himself, and say: I am the truth. Moreover, He receives the name of truth, because in Him are the eternal rules, to which all must conform in life and morals: [Marginal note: The same] Hence He Himself is the moderator of all things, made the way, the door, the vine, the trunk, the rule, the teacher, the master, the regulator, directing all, and filling them with truth, because He Himself is most full, according to that of John: We saw Him full of grace and truth, from whose fullness [Marginal note: John.] we have all received.

Christ is the Truth of the Law. Chapter III.

[Decorative woodcut initial I]nto this Christ, not only is every creature gathered, but also the whole law and the prophets tend so much, that He Himself is the truth of the law itself: because through Him, and in Him, the whole law is verified: And this is what John says: The law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ, [Marginal note: The same] completing, namely, what was written about Him in the law: And in this sense, Philip, concerning Him, who had not yet completed the scriptures, in- [Marginal note: Philip.]

--- Page 637 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

[Marginal note: CHRIST.] said: We have found Jesus, son of Joseph from Nazareth, of whom Moses wrote in the Law and the Prophets: And Truth itself says: Moses wrote of me, wishing to imply that those things which are written in the law are verified in him: Which is true, but in various ways: For sometimes his genealogy is recounted, sometimes scripture speaks of him typically and figuratively, elsewhere through effects exhibited in the power of the coming Christ, and elsewhere indeed it prophesies, promising his coming, and in many places it describes his dignity, glory, virtue, and most excellent works of many kinds: And all these things are hidden by such a veil, that unless it is removed, it cannot be clearly perceived anywhere where Mo- [Marginal note: The same Luke.] ses wrote of Christ: But with unveiled face we shall be able to contemplate something of the Lord's glory: May He grant this by His goodness, who (as Luke narrates), beginning with Moses and the prophets, so interpreted the scriptures to two companions, that they said, "Did not our heart burn within us while He opened the scriptures to us on the way?" For he begins to trace the genealogy from the first man, proceeding through the entire Pentateuch, and through the books of leaders, judges, and kings, and through the books of days, which they call Paralipomenon (Chronicles): From which Matthew and Luke took what they briefly recounted concerning his genealogy: And although these two sometimes seem to disagree, [Marginal note: Jerome. Augustine.] they do not, however, narrate falsehoods: since one describes the natural genesis, and the other the legal, just as Jerome and Augustine differ in a long series. But through figures and similitudes in almost innumerable places we have this Christ of ours depicted: For in the entire series of the tabernacle, sacrifices, and the priesthood of Melchizedek and Aaron (as Paul interprets), He Himself is described by great sacraments, as we have somewhat adumbrated above. No less concerning Jonah sent to the Ninevites, who fleeing to Tarshish is cast into the sea, and finally through his preaching impels the Assyrians to repentance, just as Truth itself relates that that matter was exhibited as a type and sign of Him. Likewise also in the entire history [Marginal note: Paul] of Abraham, who (as Paul, discussing with the Galatians, interprets) begot two sons, signifying two testaments: one indeed in the servitude of the law, and the other in the liberty of the spirit. And the son of the handmaid was firstborn, just as also the testament of servitude: But the latter and heir, the son of the free woman, just as also the testament of liberty in the spirit promises true and eternal inheritance. And just as then the son of the handmaid persecuted the son of the free woman, so also for many times since, those descending from the son of the handmaid, who are called Ishmaelites, have persecuted and persecute the co-heirs of Christ, until the time is given when there will be one fold and one shepherd: And then all things will be seen completed in clear light: Which time (unless I am mistaken) is very near: But the effects, which are narrated in the law as exhibited in the power of Christ, are almost infinite, yet all proceeding from one root: Which root is redemption, or liberation, clemency, piety, mercy, forgiveness of sin, according to that of the Apostle [Marginal note: The same]: "When you were dead in your transgressions, he made you alive together with him, having forgiven us all our transgressions, by canceling the record of debt that stood against us with its legal demands, which was contrary to us." And He took it out of the way, nailing it to the cross: Indeed, the whole doctrine of Paul by this ra-

--- Page 638 ---
**TOMVS QVARTVS.** [Page number] **249**

from this root it sprouts, often, and in many places repeating the grace which Christ acquired for us, and all the services of piety which he showed us. And to review some of the ancient effects, that was indicated by that leather garment, with which God in his clemency clothed our first parents, stripped bare by the ignominy of sin. This was intimated by every promise made to the Fathers concerning the blessing of all tribes of the earth in the seed of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and David: This, the liberation of Abraham from Ur of the Chaldeans, the blessing of Jacob, and the victory brought forth: This, the leading forth of his posterity from Egypt, and the food ministered from heaven in the desert, and the water offered from the rock, which (as the Apostle clearly says) was Christ: Whom Moses, [Marginal note: Paulus] striking the rock, gravely sinned, not trusting in the water of mercy to be freely given, without the striking of the rock itself. And according to the grace obtained from Christ, it was said to David by Nathan the prophet: [Marginal note: Natan] "I have put away your sin:" And concerning Ahab it was said to Isaiah: [Marginal note: Isaias] "Have you not seen Ahab humbled? Therefore I will not bring evil in his days." All such things, therefore, by which God showed himself clement and merciful, were effects of the coming Christ, in whose virtue the door of piety and clemency was opened, which is called the right arm by more profound Theologians: Concerning whom Isaiah [says]: "And the arm of the Lord, to whom has it been revealed?" [Marginal note: Idem Btā Vir.] And the Queen of Heaven in her Canticle [says]: "He has shown strength with his arm:" strength indeed, because no less virtue was required in restoring and redeeming than was required in creating. Then also the law, which was fiery, and on the left terrifying and killing, was led to the right hand of piety, just as Moses [Marginal note: Moses] foretold, before he blessed the children of Israel, saying: "The Lord came from Sinai, and rose for us from Seir:" and this, as to the law, in which he was seen to rise appearing in fire, when he gave it, and speaking perceptibly, and dwelling in the tabernacle, and content with the doctrine of the law (yet under a certain veil). Moses continues: [Marginal note: Idem] "The Lord appeared from Mount Paran," or rather, as we may better say according to the letter, from Mount פארן Paaran, that is, from the beautiful mountain, and full of glory: Which mountain is our Christ, [Marginal note: Psalm.] of whom it is said elsewhere: "A mountain of peaks, a rich mountain, a mountain in which it pleased God to dwell," according to that paternal voice: "This is my beloved [Marginal note: DEVS.] Son, in whom I am well pleased." From this mountain, therefore, full of glory and grace, the Lord appeared again, and with him thousands of saints, who (as Mat [Marginal note: Matth.] thew says) entered with him into the holy city, and appeared to many. Then the fiery law was seen in his right hand: Because then the fire of divine zeal and indignation was led to the right hand, and turned into the water of wisdom and piety: Therefore Christ came in water, and is said to have regenerated us through water: And this because (as it follows) he loved the peoples, no longer punishing and terrifying, but as a benign Father loving, purifying, nourishing, and giving himself in redemption for many: Through all these effects we have Christ announced in the law, sung by the prophets, and attested by the Apostles and Evangelists: But the prophecy made concerning him, especially by Moses, was always hidden, so much so that in the outer shell

II

--- Page 639 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

...in the letter's outer shell nothing appears. But if anyone, having removed the veil, looks within, he will feel his heart burning exceedingly on the way: And so that we may open some small window, Moses narrates that man was fashioned with most skillful artifice, with the image and likeness of God, adorned with both sexes, [Marginal note: Mercury.] just as Mercury testifies concerning the craftsman, as we have said elsewhere: And he describes him as preferred above all creatures, just as Paul [Marginal note: Paul] interprets word for word concerning Christ: And this before (as Moses himself says) there was a man to work the ground: Concerning the making of this man, he immediately added, saying: "Then the Lord God formed man from the dust of the ground," and the rest that follows: Whence most clearly we have the first description of human creation (as some wise men assert) [Marginal note: John] to have been about Christ: Who, just as (according to John) he was slain from the foundation of the world, so also from the foundation of the world he was brought forth, and preferred above all, according to that saying of Paul: [Marginal note: Paul] "And when he brings the Firstborn into the world, he says: Let all his [Marginal note: Moses.] angels worship him." Of him also Moses speaks, or the law in Jacob, saying: "Shiloh will come," that is, Messiah, "and he will be the expectation of the nations." Of him also Moses [Marginal note: The same] himself said, when he was chosen by God as the liberator of the people: "Send whom you will send." Innumerable are such passages in which Christ is foretold: And very many are those in which his dignity, glory, virtue, and excellent works are recounted in great number, such as that of Isaiah: [Marginal note: Isaiah] "And the government shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and of peace there will be no end, upon the throne of David and over his kingdom, to establish it and to uphold it with justice and with righteousness from this time forth and forevermore:" [Marginal note: Jacob] And that which Jacob had prophesied earlier in Genesis, saying: "The scepter shall not depart from Judah, until Messiah comes: And to him shall be gathered all nations, or peoples:" [Marginal note: David] Which the royal prophet more clearly sang in the second hymn, saying to him in the name of the Father: "Ask of me, and I will give you the nations [Marginal note: Paul] for your inheritance:" For (as Paul says) "he was made heir of all things," just as through him the ages were made, that is, this whole machine, and all who dwell in it: Therefore the prophet continues: "And your possession the ends of the earth." Thus also [Marginal note: Psalms.] in most psalms, especially in the seventy-first and eighty-eighth, the royal prophet sings many excellent praises of Christ: And to briefly conclude, there is no narration of the law or the prophets that is not referred in some way to Christ, whether immediately, as we have touched upon, or mediately, such as the mystery of the priests' vestments, which have sacraments in the priests themselves being clothed: Likewise in ours, and finally in Christ, to whom all things are referred, as we explained in the previous tone. And finally, all things are so referred to Christ, that there is no iota or tittle that is not fulfilled in him, as is clear to one who truly understands. But to write out all things individually would indeed be an inexplicable labor: Lest, however, we seem to assert these things without foundation, we will review some things in which even the smallest iota or tittle had a place in Christ, so that from a few outlined examples, the rest may be more easily believed and somewhat grasped.

--- Page 640 ---
**FOURTH TONE. 256**

How one iota, or one apex of the law, will not pass away unfulfilled and unverified in Christ. Chapter IV.

[Decorative initial I]ota is the smallest letter of the alphabet, while an apex is a point, or an accent mark. All these things are placed in scripture with due number, weight, and mystery, so much so, that Rabbi Symeon Ben Iochai and after him [Marginal note: Symeon: Elchana] Elchana, and others, not only tried to interpret sentences and words, but also to give a reason for the letters, and their figures, with apices placed below and above. And so that we may bring something forward as an example, interpreting the first word of the law, which is בראשית Beresit, they first ask why the law, and the description of the creation, begins with ב Bet.

They answer: Because ב Bet signifies a house, and indicates superior wisdom: in which all things were placed before they were brought forth into their proper forms, and through it all things were produced according to that of the Psalmographer: "You have made all things in wisdom." To which John assents, who said [Marginal note cut off]

--- Page 641 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

to the first word of the Law, and of the history of the worldly fabric, he added Tau (ת), which signifies the gather-
[Marginal note: Elchana] ing of Israel, just as Elchana expressly says: The summary sense of all these things is: In wisdom, which is the Word, and the Son of the highest Father, the first matter of all things was produced; afterwards from the fount of all good things, form was given to things, and which subsequently all things are completed with goodness; and finally the race of men, especially of the chosen ones, for whom all things were made, is indicated as produced. All these things, since they ought to be led back to that first (thing) from which they came forth, the first letter of the second word in things is Bet (ב), for it is the seal of wisdom, which is Christ, and is the beginning of Bara (ברא), which signifies to create, to purify, and to renew, implying all things are to be resumed in Christ, and to be purified by the washing which he poured out in his passion, and finally to be renewed by him risen, and leading back renewed man, and through him all creatures in him com-

--- Page 642 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 251

receiving his worship and covenant. In a similar way, in the seventy-first psalm [Psalm], in which many praises are sung about Christ, among which we have that: "His name endures, or is established, and all nations shall be blessed in him," where in Hebrew it is found: יִנּוֹן שְׁמוֹ יִתְבָּרְכוּ בוֹ כָּל גּוֹיִם iinon ſemo ueit barcu bo col goim. Of which first three words, if the first letters are taken and arranged in the way that was recently stated, this name יֵשׁוּ Iesu is formed: Where it is expressly indicated that Iesu is the name of him about whom the Prophet [David] sings so many and such great things, in whom all nations shall be blessed, and in whom alone (as Peter says [Peter]) it is necessary for men to be saved. By a more celebrated mystery, however, that same name is revealed in the same way in the ninety-fifth psalm [psalm.], where the prophet invites everyone to sing a new song for the new work that the Messiah was to celebrate: And among other passages we have this: "Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth exult: let the sea be moved, and its fullness: the fields will rejoice, and all things that are in them:" Which words in Hebrew are thus found: יִשְׂמְחוּ הַשָּׁמַיִם וְתָגֵל הָאָרֶץ יִרְעַם הַיָּם וּמְלֹאוֹ יַעֲלֹז שָׂדַי וְכָל אֲשֶׁר בּוֹ ioſmehu haſſamaim uetagel haarez, irham haiam, umluo iabelaz ſadai, uccol aſſerbo: Which words are arranged in such a way that if the first letters of the first four are taken, placed in due order, they form the great four-letter name of God, which is יהוה. But if the first letters of the following three words are taken, we have the same name without the last letter, which is יה: and this by a great mystery: For through that יה, they prove in that book, which is called Sepher Temunot, the Word and the divinity to be united with flesh, from which union Iesu is constituted: into whom the power of the great name of God is diffused, so that it almost seems to yield to Iesu: by which name alone it is now given for men to be saved: and it is given to us to work those miracles which used to be done by the power of that great four-letter name, as we have said elsewhere. Hence, in a wondrous order, follow another three words, whose first letters, placed in due order, form the name יֵשׁוּ Iesu. Because, therefore, this new name has been raised up, which the mouth of the Lord has named, therefore this prophetic hymn begins: "Sing to the Lord a new song." Hence the heavens, the sea, the lands, the fields, and all things that are in them, are invited to bring forth the praises of this Christ of ours, to whom the Father gave a name which is above every name. Indeed, it would be long to unravel all passages of sacred scripture with their mysteries, since none is devoid of its sacrament: Therefore, having brought these few as examples, we will come to the points, which are twofold: For the lower ones, which for the most part are called points, but in Hebrew נְקֻדּוֹת necudot, signify the vivifying spirit, both hovering and brooding over all members, whether of the mundane or the mystical body, about which the scripture speaks. Seeing this, Ezekiel said: "And the spirit of life was in the wheels," namely, the mundane and the human, vivifying both. But the upper points, which are called accents by us, but in Hebrew טְעָמִים, signify the divine and holy spirit, sanctifying and returning to God: Concerning this twofold spirit, which nevertheless is one, Origen speaks in *Peri Archon* [Origen] not in-II in.

--- Page 643 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

Learnedly: For although the power of the divine spirit is manifold, yet it is especially two-fold, from which it is called the spirit of life and the holy spirit: And since this is the spirit of Jesus, therefore the works accomplished by it are called the works of Jesus, and consequently those things which are found completed in the spirit are understood to be completed by Jesus: And this is,
[Marginal note: CHRISTUS.]
what our Jesus said, "He will take from what is mine and will proclaim it to you:" And again: "The Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and indeed will accomplish all things in my name." And since Jesus has done nothing, nor does he do anything,
[Marginal note: Paulus]
except in the Holy Spirit, indeed, as Paul testifies, "no one can rightly call Jesus Lord, except in the Holy Spirit," therefore no letter is found in scripture indicating and signifying the name of Jesus without its apex and punctuation: By the same reasoning, no syllable is found without its accent. And let these things suffice to be said about the apices, refraining from further disclosure: because it is not permitted to speak further: But such things are to be communicated among the perfect, or to be contemplated by the spirit, and it must be said with the pro-
[Marginal note: David]
phet: "Open my eyes, and I will consider the wonders of your law."

Christ perfected the law. Chapter V.

[Illuminated initial N depicting a figure, possibly Christ or a saint, within the letter]
NOR did he merely confirm the law by fulfilling all things contained in it, as he himself testified, saying: "I have not come to abolish
[Marginal note: CHRISTUS.]
the law, but to fulfill it," but he also perfected it, and led it to a better degree through the Gospel, which signifies good news, just as if someone were to take lead type characters of printers arranged on a tablet to express some harsh things, and then re-adapted them to express sweeter and more sublime words, while the shape of the characters remained the same: In a similar way, Christ acted, not inventing another law, but perfecting the same law, and leading it to a better destiny, so that it might seem different, though it is not, but the same, just as a cloth, when dyed with scarlet or some precious color, is perfected and not changed. Therefore, the law was perfected, dyed and colored with the blood of Christ much more happily than when sprinkled with the blood of animals,
[Marginal note: Paulus]
as the Apostle says: "Christ, having come as a high priest of the good things to come, through the greater and more perfect tabernacle, which was indeed Christ himself, true and living, not made with hands, that is, not of this creation: nor through the blood of goats or calves, but through his own blood, he entered once for all into the holy places:" From these words we clearly have that Christ, in his own blood, expanded and perfected the law: He expanded it indeed, because that law, which was observed by the single Israelite family and a few foreigners in the small region of Judea and Phoenicia, was diffused by Christ throughout the entire world and among all
[Marginal note: Psalmus]
nations, as it is sung in the psalm: "And all kings shall adore him, and all nations shall serve him:" and in many other places. He perfected it also

--- Page 644 ---
**TONE FOUR. 252**

while one adheres to Him, He promises paradise. And to conclude briefly, He showed mercy to all sinners with open speech, saying: "I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners:" And what seems great, God permitted all to incur sin and wrath, so that all might feel mercy obtained through Christ, and not through the law, by which (says Paul) no one is justified: [Marginal note: Paul] Which I would by no means dare to assert, unless the same Apostle taught me, when he says: "He has confined all under sin, that he might have mercy on all:" although the Apostle says, "he has confined them in unbelief:" For that itself is the source of all sins, and true alienation from God. And so much does the Apostle ponder this word, although he knows it to be true, that immediately crying out [Marginal note: The same] he adds: "O the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways!" But if those secrets have been entrusted to anyone, it was done on the condition that they should not be revealed to the unworthy. Hence Paul, faithful in the entrusted mysteries, did not explain, but hinted why God did this, saying: "For from him and through him and in him are all things:" for he wanted to imply: "Because just as all things were made through the very Word of God, so those very things, having been corrupted, might be restored through the same, so that from him, as from a head, we might recognize all influences and all good things to be received:" Therefore he adds: "Not to be wiser than one ought [Marginal note: The same] to be wise: because each one has, as God has divided:" For just as we have many members in one body, so also we have differing gifts according to the grace which has been given to us. And that the life and operations of all members proceed from Christ, he relates in a long discourse with the Corinthians and Ephesians, saying among other things: "To each one of us grace has been given according to the measure of the gift of Christ, according to what is said: 'Ascending on high, he led captivity captive, he gave gifts to men': For he gave some to be apostles, others prophets, and the rest that follow." Therefore, the Father willed that all things which we have, we should receive through the Son, and that we should obtain him himself, and all gifts, and charisms, and salvation, and mercy. Hence Zacharias said to his son, the recently born forerunner of the Lord: [Marginal note: Zacharias] "You will go before the Lord to prepare his ways, who indeed comes to give salvation to his people in the remission of their sins, through the bowels of his mercy, by which the dawn from on high has visited us," Therefore, no one is justified by the law, or by the blood of animals, but by him in whom the Lord has laid the iniquities of us all, by whose stripes we are healed. And Paul relates that not only men, but also all things have been brought into [Marginal note: Paul] due harmony through the blood of Christ, saying: "Making peace through the blood of his cross, whether things on earth or things in heaven." For he touches upon a great mystery, when he also testifies that even those things which are in heaven have been made peaceful through the blood of Christ, although all assert that evil angels were expelled from heaven without hope of return. What then remained in heaven to be made peaceful by the blood of Christ, unless we understand it concerning the eternal Father, and concerning all celestial powers made peaceful for us, when Christ, paying our debt in his passion, reconciled us to the Father, who had been provoked by the transgression of the first man? For as the Apostle says to the Corinthians: "Just as by one man's offense death [Marginal note: The same]
II iiij

--- Page 645 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

reigned through one, much more shall those who receive the abundance of grace, and of the gift, and of righteous-
ness, reign in life through one Jesus Christ: in whom, and not in
the law, all are healed, justified, and perfected, not only in the flesh, as it was
in the law, but in spirit, and in works, as Paul continues with the Hebrews, saying: [Marginal note: Paul]
For if the blood of goats and bulls, and the ashes of a heifer, sprinkling those who are defiled,
sanctify for the purification of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through
the Holy Spirit offered Himself without spot to God, cleanse our conscience
from dead works to serve the living God? And since much has been said in
many places about the blood of animals, something must also be discussed concerning the mys-
tery of the ashes of the red heifer, with which the defiled were sprinkled.

What the red heifer and its ashes signify in sacred rites, and in the expiation
of the defiled. Chapter VI.

**A**nd although all expiations were established by the Supreme Lawgiver in a wonderful
order, yet the mystery of the red heifer was considered most excel-
lent, and most celebrated above other sacrifices, since it
was ordained for the expiation of the most heinous crimes, and the trans-
gression of the first parents, and of the molten calf, erected by Aaron and by the
people in the desert: For expiation, I say, inasmuch as it was a figurative sac-
rifice: for all things are truly and fully expiated in Christ, as we recently touched upon: and
the more excellently this mystery of the red heifer prefigured the work of redemption,
the more celebrated it is. But if it was ordained for the expiation of the sin
of the erected calf, let us see: For the children of Israel, led out of Egypt, and freed from the
yoke of that dominion, which was ruled by the ram, still fearing that influence,
and deprived of their leader (as they supposed), wished to acquire a power stronger than
that of the Egyptians, namely the bull, which presides over the ram in the celestial circle:
Hence, by a certain more secret art, with things arranged, and metal melted in the usual way, a
calf was fashioned: And setting it up, still ignorant of divine matters, they thought to draw
a power superior to the ram, and thereby to prevail (if necessary) against those who were
ruled by the ram: But this was an error, and a very great sin, while they wished to attribute
favor to the celestial bull, which they ought to have received from the living God, as they had
hitherto received. The error was also increased because they erected the image of a beast
against the commandment of God their helper: For this crime, and wound, by God's own
command, two remedies were applied: One, because many were commanded to be expiated in their own
blood: Which was carried out by the sons of Levi, whence they earned the blessing,
of which that family had been deprived on account of the crime perpetrated against the Shechemites: The other
remedy was this red heifer: Whose mystery let us somewhat explore: Ob-
serve, I pray, the order: A cow, or heifer, is chosen against the sin of the adored
calf, so that purification may be made through that by which one sinned: But the weaker sex is assumed,
lest we believe that expiation is made by the power of the animal itself: for it was not from the ani-
mal, but from divine power that the purification flowed: Hence not more worthily

--- Page 646 ---
TONE FOUR. 253

animal, but a weaker one in sex is chosen: And so that the favor to be drawn might be proven, not from the animal itself, but from heaven, God commanded it to be burned with all its entrails, by that fire, namely, which was supplied from heaven for receiving burnt offerings, as we can learn from many places in scripture, and as is widely known by common report among the Hebrews: Which fire (as they say) was given from heaven throughout the entire time of the first temple, but was also sometimes supplied in the second, as we have from the second book of Maccabees: where it is read that Nehemiah, coming from Persia to offer sacrifice, sought the hidden heavenly fire, and did not find it, but thick water: with which he commanded the sacrifices to be sprinkled, since he did not have fire supplied from heaven.
Elijah however, in the time of the first temple, to prove that the worship of his God was better than the worship of the prophets of Baal, exposed his sacrifice to fire supplied from heaven, seeking that the prophets of Baal should do likewise: And when the fire by no means consumed the sacrifice of those false prophets, but burned Elijah's sacrifice and presented it transformed into fire to heaven, Elijah's worship was proven true and good, as is found in the third book of Kings. Therefore, the cow having been burned with all its entrails by this fire, the defiled were sprinkled with those ashes, according to that saying of Paul: For if the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer, sprinkled, sanctify the defiled for the purification of the flesh, and of blood, namely, according to which sin comes into man, therefore sin tastes of the nature of red blood: whence Esau, the sinner, was called Edom, that is, red, and sold his birthright for something red. The first parent also, through whom sin was introduced into all, was named Adam, which (as they say) means red earth in our language. But if we carefully consider those characters, that name signifies something sanguine mixed with divinity: For it is composed of א Aleph, which is a letter indicating divinity, and דם, dam, which signifies blood. Hence, especially for the expiation of the sin not only of the adored calf, but also of the protoplast, a red heifer is chosen, signifying, namely, not the redness of flesh and blood, but a better redness, concerning which it is said in the Song of Songs: "My beloved is radiant and ruddy: radiant indeed with innocence, ruddy with charity and fiery fervor." And just as Adam, through whom sin was introduced into the lower world, was called red or red earth, because he was drawn from האדמה adama, which signifies red earth, so David, chosen according to the heart of the Lord, was called אדמוני Admoni, that is, ruddy or red-haired, as we have in the first book of Kings: And Christ descending from him, a heavenly man indeed from heaven, the restorer of sin introduced by the first earthly man, was red, if painting teaches us the truth, and those who describe his physiognomy: Whose redness was so efficacious that just as the whiteness of his transfigured body overflowed into his garments, so that they appeared white as snow, so also the fervor of the same suffering one was diffused into his garments, so much so that (as Dionysius testifies) the angels, marveling, said that passage from Isaiah: "Why is your garment made red?" It is not surprising, therefore, if to prefigure the expiation to be made through

II v.

[Marginal notes:]
Nehemiah
Paul
Song of Songs
Kings
Isaiah

--- Page 647 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

...the celestial ruddy man from sin contracted through the earthly red man, a red heifer is commanded to be chosen: But this ought to be perfect, and defiled by no blemish, and bearing no yoke of inferior servitude, so that it might fully indicate the purification which ought to be done in the law of liberty, and most perfect by Him who freed us from all servitude: And so that it might more easily receive celestial influence, if any was then given, which declines from things defiled and corrupted by any blemish, as we are more clearly taught in the law. The heifer was also slaughtered outside the camp, as the Apostle says concerning it, and concerning the true holocaust, with the Hebrews [Paulus]: "Of which animals the blood is brought for sin into the holy places, their bodies were burned outside the camp: Because of this, Jesus also, so that he might sanctify the people through his blood, suffered outside the camp, so that he might expiate them, even those who through sin had been excluded from the assembly of the righteous, according to that which the supreme Redeemer says [CHRI STVS.]: 'I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.' And again through another Evangelist: 'The Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost.'" Also from the blood of the slaughtered heifer, the priest, with a dipped finger, sprinkled seven times towards the doors of the tabernacle, indeed, in the number of remission, so that it might indicate the remission to be made in the blood of the true holocaust, who also alone is the door through which we enter to salvation and life. Afterwards it was burned by that fire supplied from heaven, so that it might be a fitting remedy, or at least a figure of a remedy, against the blemish derived from inferior fire and redness. Finally, from the ashes of the burned animal, the defiled were sprinkled not without mystery, because nothing more sanctifies the animal, and our redness, than its mortification and burning done by that holy fire which the Redeemer came to send upon the earth. But a wondrous sacrament arises: For if that ash sanctified and cleansed the defiled, why was the priest defiled who carried that ash outside the camp, or who burned it? Hence concerning this ash it was said, that it purified the defiled, and defiled the clean. From these things I infer that since the sacrament of this heifer, and of other sacrifices, is multifaceted and profound among all things which are found in sacred scripture, hence the question is resolved in multiple ways and for different meanings. Some therefore say that that defilement and cleanness was contracted by the priest burning it, because the thing was more sacred than that priestly rank, just as it happens to a layman or a woman touching sacred things and the body of Christ, which ought to be handled only by those existing in sacred orders: Others say, because sacred things received with devotion and reverence purify, but handled irreverently, or curiously investigated, defile: Still others say that as far as the letter sounds, the one burning it was unclean, that is, touching it, until that animal was expiated by fire: and whoever handled those ashes outside the camp, or in any way, as if anyone were handling a corpse: whence it immediately follows: "Whoever touches the corpse of a man shall be unclean for seven days: but sprinkled with water with those ashes on the third and seventh day, he shall be cleansed:" Others say that the place for those ashes was in the camp, therefore, touching them outside the camp was unclean, just as with consecrated things in an unsuitable place—

--- Page 648 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 254

But if we wish to investigate this matter further, and reveal something of the hidden mysteries, we will say that this red heifer is the Blessed Virgin, of the lineage of ruddy David, through whom a blessing was introduced, expelling the curse and infection diffused by Eve into the human Race. And lest we be ashamed to assert this without reason, let us briefly see how much harmony all things converge in this sense. Eve, ruddy and earthly; Mary, ruddy and heavenly, and full of fiery spirit, and full of grace and virtues, as the heavenly oracle attests, so that she could say that from Ecclesiasticus: "My dwelling is in the fullness of the saints." [Marginal note: The Church.] Therefore it is said that that heifer had to be chosen perfect, whole, and without any blemish: Which had not been pressed by any yoke, just as the Virgin declared to the heavenly messenger, saying: "For I know not a man." Also, the sacrifice of this heifer, and all its mysteries, were celebrated outside the camp and the common assembly even of the chosen people, just as all of Mary's mysteries were celebrated outside the common law: For she was announced by an angel, overshadowed by the Holy Spirit, made pregnant by divine power, and filled with grace not common, but that which was with God, the primary source of all good things: and she bore a son without pain, the enclosure of virginity being preserved, always proceeding beyond the laws of nature. Hence Solomon, seeking and investigating her, says in Proverbs: [Marginal note: Solomon] "Who can find a virtuous woman?" And lest he seem to have sought despairingly, he adds prophetically: "Far off and from the uttermost coasts," or "from the innermost parts" (as the truth of the letter has it), "is her price."

And so that we may relate something of the mysteries of a more secret Theology, we will also observe with what sacrament the numbers of the letters of the heifer and Mary agree: For the name of Mary, which is written thus in Hebrew מרים (Miriam), gives me 290: But the cow (heifer), which is written thus in Hebrew characters פרה (Parah), gives in number 285. To which, if the letter He (ה), or the number five, taken from Sarah (שרה) by the Lord's command, who was previously called Sarai (שרי), is restored, it totals 290: Which number was also taken from the first woman by Adam, when he called her Ishah (אשה), where she is commonly considered "virago" (woman, from man), because she was taken from man: Where

--- Page 649 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...of His handmaid. Therefore, the people were sprinkled with these, as a kind of prelude to the true and complete expiation that was to take place in Christ: To which, finally, all legal ordinances and everything else respond, either mediately or immediately. But concerning this sacrifice, as a more celebrated and profoundly full sacrament, with the Spirit suggesting and impelling us, we will briefly explain how it was fulfilled in our Christ, so that through Him, all other things may also be understood as fulfilled. Let no one criticize me because I said that the heifer burned for the expiation of sin signifies the Blessed Virgin, as if I wished to imply that she was offered for our expiation: I do not mean this, since there is only one expiator and redeemer of all. But I wished to imply that just as sin had its beginning from a woman [Angel] overcome by the angel of death, so also expiation should begin from the angel of light and life, [Matthew] who brought this oracle from heaven to her: "Behold, you will conceive and bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, who (as is said in another Evangelist) will save his people from their sins." But let us pass on to other things.

**How the Doctrine of Christ is supremely true. Chapter VII.**

[Illuminated initial 'I'] IN Christ, not only was the law fulfilled, as we have somewhat shadowed forth from thousands (of examples), but also those things which He taught are proven to be most true. [CHRIST] First, because His doctrine emanated from the fount of truth, who is the Father, as He Himself explained, saying: "He who sent me is true." And again: "I have not spoken on my own authority, but the Father who sent me has Himself given me a commandment as to what I should say and what I should speak." This doctrine, therefore, emanating from the paternal fount, descended through the first channel of truth, creating a most profound sea of the highest [CHRIST] wisdom, who is the Son, to speak in the manner of the Hebrews. Hence, in repeated discourse, He Himself says: "My doctrine is not mine." Mine, indeed, because it was given to me by hereditary right; mine, because taught by me; but not mine, because it drew its origin from elsewhere. Hence, [Augustine] it is true because it is in harmony, indeed, identical with that of the supreme fount of truth. Therefore, it is always true, because existing in the Son, it has become the goal, the line, and the rule of all things that have been made in the world, since all things themselves pre-existed in Him, and were made precisely through Him, according to the idea of them that was in Him. And because it is the rule of all things to be done, both by us and by intelligences who consult it (as Augustine says) as the fount of life and truth, therefore, the more one conforms to that wisdom and rule, the more perfectly one is in truth; and the more one deviates from it, the further one departs from truth. [CHRIST] Hence, concerning the devil, Truth itself said: "That murderer, or killer, and having become death itself, did not stand in the truth from the beginning." This is because he departed from Christ, indeed, he presumed to rise up against Him and devour Him, when He was foretold in heaven as about to be born of a woman clothed with the sun and crowned with twelve stars. Moreover, it was true, because no falsehood was ever contained in His words: Perceiving this, He, the knower of all things, said: "Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away." For (as we have said) there was no prophet whom opinion did not sometimes deceive,

--- Page 650 ---
**VOLUME FOUR.** 255

except Christ, in whom there is no error. For with this privilege he had been adorned by the Father, who was always with him, fulfilling all things that he said, according to that which he says: "He who sent me is with me, and has not left me alone, because I always do what is pleasing to him." For all of us (says [Marginal note: Isaiah] Isaiah) have strayed like sheep, but he never committed iniquity, nor was deceit found in his mouth. Finally, it was true, because it was always derived from the first and most true principle of all, which says: "I [Marginal note: CHRIST.] am the beginning, who speak to you:" Indeed, the beginning of all things, the beginning of all perfection and salvation, and also the beginning of all truths: To whom all easily assent with known terms, understanding, namely, how that principle signifies him, through whom and in whom all things were made, and in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and all truths that can be demonstrated concerning any matter, so that Habakkuk rightly says of him: [Marginal note: Habakkuk] "He found every way of discipline, and delivered it to Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved." After these things, he was seen on earth teaching and explaining what he had previously foretold through the mouths of the Prophets.

**What about the truth of the law, those things which Christ taught. Chapter VIII.**

[Large initial S] But since the law has already been given by God with the highest truth through the angels of truth in the hand of the mediator, it is not foolish to ask what truth they contain, and what agreement those things which Christ taught have with the law: Whether it is something against the law, or different from the law, or from the law itself, or interpretations and perfection of the law. Indeed, the doctrine of him who came to fulfill the law even to the smallest jot contains nothing against the law. Nor is it different from the law, since he himself referred those who sought salvation to the law: Nor is it the law itself to the letter, because a double tradition of the law and a simple reiteration would have been superfluous; rather, those things which Christ taught seem to be something else from the law, from the doctrine of him in whose breast Christ himself resonates: who, placing a distinction between the law and the Gospel, says with the Romans: "By the works of the law no [Marginal note: Paul] flesh will be justified: for through the law comes the knowledge of sin: but now the righteousness of God has been manifested apart from the law, being testified by the law and the prophets." But if the law gives knowledge of sin and does not justify, while the Gospel justifies, and that apart from the law, although it was foretold in the law, the Gospel is entirely something else from the law, yet not diverse, since the law testifies concerning the Gospel. Therefore, this was a place occupied by shadow and darkness, until it should be illuminated by the succeeding light, which says: "I am the light of the [Marginal note: CHRIST.] world:" of whom Isaiah also prophesied, saying: "The people who walked in [Marginal note: Isaiah] darkness have seen a great light: and upon those who dwelt in the land of the shadow of death, light has dawned for them:" But when? When a child was born to us, and a son was given to us: whose name is Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Prince of Peace, Father of the Age to Come: who is our Christ, by whom we are regenerated and taught. Therefore, the Gospel is a light illuminating and interpreting the law: It is also the sweetest fruit of the hard trunk and bitter root of the law: For indeed, this was bitter, as Paul says [Marginal note: Paul]

--- Page 651 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

lo: The Law works the wrath of God, because where there is no law, neither is there transgression: And again, which seems exceedingly harsh: The Law entered in, so that transgression might abound: Therefore [Marginal note: Paul] is the Law evil, is the Law sin? By no means! says the Apostle: For I knew sin through the Law, from which it itself took opportunity to enter in: The Law indeed is holy, and the commandment just, and good: And again: The Law is spiritual: And if I know evil through the Law, therefore the Law is not evil: And if, what I do not want, that I do, I consent to the Law, because it is good: to which indeed wishing to consent, I would not wish to do that evil, because against the Law. Therefore the Law is not evil, but bitter, because from it I feel the bitterness of sin: For I would not have known covetousness, unless the Law had said, "You shall not covet": For without the Law sin was dead: And then I lived without the Law: But when the commandment had come, sin revived, which indeed was contracted through the Law, by which to the first parent it was said: "From the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat." Nor were others bound by any law, except that which was written in their hearts, until the commandment was made public, which bound that Israelite family, and certain foreigners, who had received the Law: in whom sin revived, the occasion of sin having been given: because the strength of sin is the Law: Which was so bitter, and deadly, that from it itself all were subjected to death, just as to the first Progenitor, from whose seed all came forth, it was said: "In whatever hour you eat, you shall surely die." But the sweetest fruit of the Law is the Gospel, in which Christ is joyfully announced, and declared: to whom he who believes, it is reckoned to him for righteousness: Nor was this voice (Paul being witness) delivered for Abraham alone, but for all of us, to whom it is reckoned for righteousness, believing in Him, who raised our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead, who was delivered up for our transgressions, and rose again for our justification. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: through whom we have access by faith into this grace by which we stand, and we rejoice in the hope of the glory of the children of God: Which glory, and consolation we have in Christ, who is the fruit of the Law, and the true interpretation of the Law itself, and its true perfection: For from that wisdom we have, from which we may be justified from sins contracted through the Law, and from which we may be freed from the servitude of the Law, and from which we may obtain mercy, and grace: which are the antidotes to the infecting Law: For from the Law we contract guilt, from the Gospel medicine: From the Law we feel punishing justice, but from Christ and the Gospel grace, and mercy. From the Law transgression, from the Gospel whence transgression may be forgiven: Through the Law all of us, like sheep, have gone astray, through Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life, our feet are directed into the way of peace: From the Law, whence our iniquities, like a heavy burden, weigh upon us: but in Christ the Father laid all our iniquities upon Him: Through the Law the soul is wounded, and weakened: but by the stripes of Christ we are healed.

--- Page 652 ---
FOURTH TONE. 256

By what rectitude of truth Christ God governs the world. Chapter IX.

[Large initial S] But before we come to those particulars which he taught according to truth, let us see by what rectitude he governs the world, to whom the Father gave all judgment, and all power in heaven and on earth, although it may seem contrary to those who do not fully perceive the things that are of God: and with what hidden wisdom the supreme governor himself permits many evils, so that from them he may extract a greater good, and the wisdom and goodness of him who governs may appear: Who, just as from the beginning in the worldly fabric he placed evil against good, the inverted and crooked against the straight, darkness against light, the passive against the active, cold against heat, and many such things, in like manner in the members of the true and mystical body, he placed one against the other, in the former the right against the left, but in the latter the angel of darkness against the angel of light, the wicked against the good: Among these, some are elegantly enumerated by Clement in the Recognition of Peter [Marginal note: Clemens]: namely Cain against Abel, the Giants against Noah, Pharaoh against Abraham, and against his family chosen by God, the Philistines and Gerarites against Isaac, Esau against Jacob, likewise he brings forward the Magi against Moses, the Tempter against the Redeemer, Simon Magus against Peter, the Gentiles against the faithful, the son of iniquity against Christ: Therefore he is now called by all Antichrist, as if against Christ. And thus all things have their contraries, so that, as if by a certain *antiparistasis*, a sweeter harmony of the worldly and human body may be achieved: Whence Dionysius, in that work in which he treats of divine names, discusses evil as something pertaining to Divine providence and to the harmonious disposition of things [Marginal note: Diony.]. Hence also Amos with great confidence broke forth: "There is no evil in the city which the Lord has not made" [Marginal note: Amos]: And Isaiah, speaking in the person of God, says: "I am creating evil" [Marginal note: Isaias.]. Yet God does not create punishment, as some explain, because the wicked person generates it from discordant morals and a troubled mind: since every disordered mind (as Augustine rightly believes) is a punishment to itself [Marginal note: Augusti.]. Therefore God is creating evil, because he created matter, which by its very nature is evil, and draws all things relying on it and adhering to it towards evil, because it causes them to recede from the first and highest act, which is the very rule of good and truth: He also makes all evil, who made nature mutable and annexed to matter, whence it becomes prone to evil. Nor can the Creator himself be considered evil on that account, since he has prepared a much greater remedy of goodness, and offers it to the willing, than is the proneness to evil. Nor could any creature be produced which by its very nature would not differ from the first rule, from which, differing in morals and will, it sins. Hence Anselm, and others following him, say that God could not have made an impeccable nature [Marginal note: Anselm.]: because he could not make another God, who would be the first rule of all things. But since I do not wish to be a judge of divine power, and to assert whether God could have done this or that, or not, since he himself can do many things which we cannot understand, therefore, abstaining from that judgment, let us say that it was entirely sought in the primal distribution of things;

--- Page 653 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

so that with a suitable limitation, a measure of good things might be given to each, lest anyone presume to claim for himself what had been bestowed by the supreme giver. Whence, because the first apostate had been endowed more than was fitting, he swelled with great pride, saying: "I will ascend into heaven, above the stars of God, that is, above all the elect; I will exalt my throne. I will sit on the mount of the covenant, on the sides of the north; I will ascend above the height of the clouds, namely, those higher ones in which the Lord is accustomed to dwell; and I will be like the Most High." And while he presumed to make himself like God by his own strength, the sinner departed from Him and became utterly unlike Him. Therefore, to crush and punish his pride, it is added below: "Nevertheless, you shall be brought down to hell, to the depths of the pit."

Moreover, it was fitting that every ra[Marginal note: Augustine.]tional creature, knowing itself, should say with Augustine: "When I stood, I stood by You; when I fell, I fell by myself; and had I fallen, I would have always lain in the mud, had You not raised me up." Finally, it was again fitting that each thing be governed in such a way that their governor would allow them to perform their own movements. But if they should fall, they would be led back to their proper order by the governor's providence. And in the first, the most wise maker appears as a distributor; in the second, a benevolent and free preserver; in the third, from the abundance of goodness, the best restorer. Therefore God made all things very good and ordered; and yet there is no evil that He does not make, by granting a mutable nature, and one inclined to fall by its own weight, unless they are sustained by that supreme good by whom they were also created, so that all things may learn that He who was also the creator is the same preserver and helper. And thus we would be bound to Him in two ways: both because He is the maker, and because He preserves and perfects. Therefore, there is no evil properly or formally (as they say) from the supreme good; but that in which evil is founded, namely mutable nature, and that by which we are drawn to evil, which is matter utterly removed from good, and especially by the most wicked tempter driving us, who, utterly removed from God, seeks to gather all with him to the center of his wickedness, and to tear them away from the sphere of good and happiness. Between these two, namely the supreme good and the most wicked perverter, man is placed in such freedom that God does not wish to be made the perpetrator of good or evil [Marginal note: Jeremiah.] from Himself, according to that of Jeremiah in Lamentations: "From the mouth of the Most High will neither good nor evil proceed," so that, namely, He might be the complete perpetrator of neither of them, although He is a cooperator of anyone who works well. Nor is any evil found to be effected by God, which man, desiring it, might commit as sin; because there is nothing outside the universe; and those things which are found within it are very good, yet contained within their own limits and distributed according to their own degrees; but evil is perpetrated when, [Marginal note: Dionysius, Hugh the Wise.] having scorned a greater good, we cling to a lesser one. Hence Dionysius, and Hugh his interpreter, and all true wise men agree that sin, both in angels and in humans, was and is when someone, departing from the supreme good or a greater good, wishes to delight in a lesser one. Hence God Himself encompasses the whole sum of sin, when He says [Marginal note: Jeremiah.] through Jeremiah: "My people have committed two evils: they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, the Lord, and they have dug for themselves broken cisterns, which cannot hold

--- Page 654 ---
**FOURTH TONE.** **257**

hold water. Nor is it only sin when a created good is preferred to the highest good, but also when, there being two created goods, the lesser is preferred, just as one who prefers his own convenience to the public or the many's utility: From which error the Apostle, turning away, said: "Seek not what is profitable for myself, [Marginal note: Paul] but what is profitable for many:" In like manner, when a bodily good and pleasure is preferred to spiritual delight. It is (to conclude finally) sin and error, when the due order is perverted, so that Augustine's saying is true: "Evil is the privation of order, or of due rectitude." [Marginal note: Augustine.] This error, or perversion of order, is not from any virtue granted by God, but from our weakness or obscurity contracted by idleness, which the Savior, and with him Dionysius, and Damascene [Marginal note: Savior] call night, or darkness, saying: "He who is in darkness does not know where he is going:" And again: "He who follows me," that is, the supreme guide, "does not walk in darkness," [Marginal note: Dionysius] that is, of sins: Which darkness is followed by the eternal night of hell: concerning which he again says: "The night will come, when no one will be able to work." [Marginal note: Damascene] And just as night, or obscurity, is the privation of light, so error is the privation of rectitude: Whence it is concluded that the proper essence of sin is the privation of good: into which man falls either by perverting the order in his choice, or by presuming from himself what he ought to have recognized from the supreme teacher. Therefore, fault is not from God, but from a will choosing badly, or presuming too much: But that which is badly preferred is from God, and the will, which errs by its own fault in choosing, is also from God. Therefore, Christ, both God-man and man-God, remains the true best moderator, while he exhorts and favors living well and rightly, as we most clearly prove in his doctrine and deeds.

**What Christ taught in truth concerning things to be believed. Chapter X.**

[Decorative initial Q containing a figure of a scholar at a desk] But concerning what our supreme Doctor taught regarding things to be believed, all agree on those which are called articles of faith: In which the Trinity, already explained by Christ, is expressly contained: For no one before Him had openly revealed the Trinity, clearly expressing the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and the "circuminsession" (as they say) of these persons, just as Christ taught, saying: "I am in the Father, and the Father is in me." And concerning their productions, no one before had even spoken a word, but Christ openly explained, saying: "I came forth from the Father," as a Son, that is, begotten by Him. And concerning the Holy Spirit, that He proceeds from the Father, He says: "The Spirit who proceeds from the Father:" and that He also proceeds from the Son Himself, contrary to what some ignorant Greeks, misunderstanding the sayings of their fathers, falsely assert, He says: "He will receive from mine:" Not indeed did He merely receive doctrine, becoming a disciple of the very Word, like a little boy instructed in schools, but He received being and understanding, by which He instructed the Apostles, and before them the prophets: For the wisdom and understanding of the divine persons, and their other properties or attributes (as they say) are not distinguished, nor as accidents

**KK**

--- Page 655 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

are infused anew: whence whatever one person is said to have received from another, it is immediately concluded to have received the whole of what it is, and all things attributed to it: because neither can they be separated, nor received successively: Therefore, just as the Son confesses himself to exist from the Father, and to have received doctrine from the same in such a way, that he possesses the very doctrine of the Father and not his own, in like manner let us confess the Holy Spirit to be from the Father and the Son, simultaneously with doctrine, and to have received doctrine simultaneously with personal being. And since we have learned with sufficiently clear light from the words of our teacher Christ, those things which are attributed to each person, and those things which Christ himself had come to accomplish, we can easily profess or recite the articles of faith with the Apostles: For when we have learned that the Father is the first fount, from whom the Son and the Spirit proceeded, we can attribute the fabric of the world to Him as the chief maker, saying: I believe in God the Father Almighty, creator of heaven and earth, of all things visible and invisible. And when we have learned that wisdom is attributed to the Son, in which both the world and we were created, and by which we are all enlightened: and is called true water not only super-celestial, but super-mundane, to Him deservedly the restoration of the whole fabric, and especially of man, is attributed, so that all things might be restored by the same wisdom by which they were also created: and the human race might be washed by that laver emanating from the super-mundane fount, since it could not be washed by a mundane one, because the whole man was entirely infected: Moreover, we profess this restoration, while we unfold the principal acts of the Redeemer, namely, his conception by the Holy Spirit, birth, passion, burial, descent into hell, so that he might lead forth the captives from there, resurrection, and ascension, and return to the Father, from whom he had come forth, so that by him he might happily raise all his followers. And since we are taught to attribute love and connection to the Holy Spirit: hence when we have professed the Spirit himself, immediately we add: And the holy catholic church, namely, universal communion, and the bond of the faithful. And when again we have learned that remission is given through the Holy Spirit, our teacher saying, "Receive the Holy Spirit, whose sins you remit are remitted to them," therefore we also add, "The remission of sins." And through this the gathering of the faithful into one church, which they call mother, and the remission of sins are said to proceed from the Holy Spirit: because the place of both is the same in the archetype, and [Marginal note: Theolo.] of the remitting Holy Spirit, and of the rejoicing mother of sons, as ancient theologians teach: concerning which it is not permitted to speak in detail to those not initiated into such mysteries. And since we ought to return to the Father, from whom we departed, and to be united with Him, just as by our teacher we are taught, a transformation of our body for the better is necessary for us: hence we profess the resurrection of the flesh, and its renewal, before one comes to life, which is our ultimate and eternal end. And although some things are attributed to the Father, others to the Son, and others of those things which we profess to the Holy Spirit, nevertheless [Marginal note: The same] the divine persons are not separated in working concerning us, as all our Theologians proclaim: For even if the fabric of the world is attributed to the Father, as the chief parent, nevertheless the Son is not absent, in whom the Father produced and sustains all things. Nor was the Spirit external

--- Page 656 ---
**FOURTH TONE.** 258

he, who hovering over the waters was brooding, and giving form to all things. In like manner, although the restoration of the world and the cleansing of the human race is ascribed to the Son, as the immediate restorer and savior, nevertheless the power of the Father of lights was not lacking, from whom comes every good gift, and who is the first fount, from whom the Son received the water poured out in our washing: Nor was the Holy Spirit separate, by whose power the virgin was made fruitful, and the Word united with that assumed nature, through which he might repair the whole mass of the human race. These things indeed, taught by our teacher, we legitimately profess. But also another thing remains by no means to be omitted, which we ought also to profess with the utmost observance, namely, that there is one only redeemer of all, in whom believing we are saved, Peter saying: "There is not in any other salvation: For there is no other [Marginal note: Pet. i a] name given to men, in which it is necessary for men to be saved, except this one." Which also the redeemer himself revealed in that gospel, which is titled according to John, saying: "Thus God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that everyone who be- [Marginal note: CHRIST] lieves in him may not perish, but may have eternal life:" And again: "He who has believed and has been baptized, will be saved: but he who has not believed, will be condemned." From which words, and from many other places described, we have it that we must believe in the Son of God, conceived of the Holy Spirit, born of the virgin, suffered on account of our sins: so that, namely, through his death he might expiate all kinds of our guilt, and bring an antidote to all poisoned by the deadly wound of the ancient serpent: And that he rose for our justification: and that he might give a beginning to a new life, which we await, and in which we can be blessed: Which, even if it is contained in our creed in essence, nevertheless we do not have it clearly explained. For here seems to be concluded the whole matter of man, redemption, and faith: that, namely, the first earthly man was produced from the earth, who, imbibing the poison of the devil and the deadly serpent, departed from God, drawing with him at the root the whole tree of the human race into the servitude of the devil, and into the food of death, according to what had been said: "In whatever hour you eat, by the persuasion, namely, of the serpent, you will surely die." For the wisest Creator well knew that man was to be invaded and tempted by the angel of death and the virulent serpent, whence the human race was wounded by a deadly and irreparable wound: because sin was (as we said elsewhere) in a certain way against the Holy Spirit. Hence a remedy ought to be brought by a man who was not of that infected stock, but would descend from heaven, heavenly: By whose skin first the nakedness of earthly man, induced by sin (as we read), would be covered: Afterwards, by the flesh of that better serpent eaten by us, we would be healed from the wound inflicted by that most wicked serpent. And this is what our good serpent and heavenly man says: "Just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the desert, so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that everyone who [Marginal note: The same] believes in him may not perish, but may have eternal life." Indeed, the flesh of the serpent was a good antidote against the poison of the serpent: And if every serpent has an antidote for its own poison, more happily does the better and best serpent have it, who not only cured us from poison, but gave us the power of treading upon serpents and scorpions, and upon
KK ij

--- Page 657 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

[Marginal note: Luke] all the power of the enemy: as it is said in the Gospel, which is titled according to Luke. Lastly, it must be believed that he came with that great power, by which he could snatch us from the dominion of death,
[Marginal note: Peter] and from the power of darkness, and make us believers (as Peter says) an elect race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people of acquisition, or acquired, and snatched from the perdition brought about by sin, and dragging down our earthly lot, pushing it to ruin by that deadly angel, who had already fallen from his happy lot. These indeed are the things which our teacher Christ taught us to profess, provided that we fulfill by deed what we profess and believe: And because some, not only in our time, but also in past times, have stubbornly tried to assert that faith alone suffices for salvation, therefore, what should be held as constant in this matter, we will briefly try to explain from the sacred scriptures: For we cannot express it otherwise, since reasons are less sufficient, nor should others be believed concerning those things which are discussed in the secret court of the prince, except those who are privy to the prince himself: Of which kind were in our matter the Apostles, Evangelists, prophets, and the prince Christ himself, and our supreme teacher, to whom all ought to give undoubted faith.

That faith alone, which is pure credulity, is by no means sufficient for salvation. Chapter XI.

[Large illuminated initial F] Indeed, there were not only in our time, but much older, even among the Hebrews, those who wanted to assert that faith alone suffices for salvation: And they were called Rabbis: because they followed the opinions of certain teachers: against whom, on the other hand, another sect arose, which was called the Karaites: because they followed only the reading and text of sacred scripture, admitting no opinions of men, nor the sophistical reasonings of teachers: Omitting their reasons and inventions for the present, we will come to [Marginal note: Moderns.] our contemporaries, who, relying on many authorities from the Gospel and the Apostles, which seem to assert the same, have dared to attribute so much to faith, that they in some way condemn works: indeed, they seem to assert that faith cannot coexist with works, because if someone presumed to be justified by works, this would be to limp on two sides, to worship Baal, and to kiss the hand: which is the greatest iniquity, as Job says, Furthermore, they add and say: When you begin to believe, at the same time you learn that all things that are in you are utterly blameworthy, sins, and damnable, [Marginal note: Paul] according to that of the Apostle: All have sinned, and fall short of the glory of God: [Marginal note: Psalms.] And again: There is no one righteous, no one who does good, all have turned aside, together they have become useless: And pursuing many things of this kind, they finally infer this: Therefore, the first concern of any Christian ought to be, that, setting aside the opinion of works, faith alone may grow stronger and stronger, and through it may grow in the knowledge not of works, but of Christ Jesus, who suffered and was raised for him: in whom (as Peter says) believing, you will rejoice with inexpressible joy, obtaining the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls. So also Christ, who (as John narrates) when asked by the Jews what they should do to perform the works of God, He, having rejected the multitude of works with which he saw them swollen, prescribed one thing to them, saying: This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent.

--- Page 658 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS.
259
For faith has with it universal salvation, preserving from all evil, as the author of faith himself explains in a brief discourse at the end of the Gospel, which is titled according to Mark, when he says: "He who has believed and has been baptized will be saved; but he who has not believed will be condemned." Paul agrees, who, discussing with the Romans, says: "If you confess with your mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved." And again: "Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes." And earlier, bringing forth the saying of the prophet and the oracle, he says: "The righteous shall live by faith." And many other sayings of the Gospel and the Apostles could be brought forth, which seem to sound the same, which they themselves did not even bring forth: but let these suffice for the time being. Let us also bring into consideration how sophistically they try to save, [arguing] that by faith alone satisfaction will be made for so many commanded works, ceremonies of the law, and all affirmative precepts: For they say that something else pertains to the inner man...

--- Page 659 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

he will be saved: Elsewhere also He said: If you wish to enter into life, keep the commandments: And what
is greater, He concluded the whole business of obtaining salvation and blessedness in works,
saying: From these two commandments depend the whole law and the prophets: For He did
not say, the law and the prophets depend on faith, but on the love of God and neighbor:
which consist in work, and not in mere belief: What then will the new dogmatizers say to this?
For, overcome by this and similar sayings of the Supreme Truth and His
disciples, they praise work, since they cannot exclude it, but immediately, applying
poison, they add that work must be done only to mortify the rebellious body and
subject it to the spirit, but that work is of no value for salvation, thinking thereby to
magnify the service of Christ the Redeemer, to whom they attribute everything:
Indeed, that offering and prayer made for us was most efficacious and
most sufficient for the salvation of all: Yet it was such that the very one offering wishes us
to be His co-workers, according to that saying of the Apostle: For we are God's co-workers. Hence the
Redeemer Himself, having distributed the resources acquired in the work of redemption (which in
Matthew He calls talents, but in Luke minas), adds: 'Trade until I come:'
Where two things are to be noted: First, the money or gifts bestowed from the treasury
of His clemency and fullness acquired in the work of redemption; Secondly, our
cooperation is indicated when it is said: 'Trade.' And what is more to be observed, unless
we return a profit by trading, He threatens punishment, namely to him who, having hidden
his talent, brings back no profit by cooperating. If, therefore, work is not necessary, why
is it demanded of us with such a great threat? Why does He command him who neglects to co-
operate with the given talent to be cast into outer darkness? Tell me, I ask, new theologians,
by what justice are those punished who omit things to which they are in no way obligated? How
does your opinion stand with the opinion of truth? The Supreme Truth says: He who does not
work according to the grace given, will be cast into outer darkness, that
is, he will be condemned and deprived of salvation: But you say, Faith saves without
works: One of the two undoubtedly errs: Certainly not the Supreme Truth: Therefore,
you err, who presume to interpret the meaning of the Gospel too much against and above
so many wise men. Nor is it wonderful if you rush into open error, since from the Supreme Truth
speaking intimately with the Father, that decree is recalled: 'You have hidden these things from the
wise and prudent' (namely, in their own eyes, and those who despise others), 'and have revealed
them to little ones,' who prefer to humbly agree with others, rather than, appearing singular,
to be led by pride and arrogance, along with negligent workers, into inner
and outer darkness.

If again our Redeemer does not demand our works as necessary for salvation: why does His herald, already instructed in evangelical doctrine, cry out and protest, saying: 'Bear worthy fruits of repentance?' And granted that repentance is a turning back to God (as you assert, and as the Hebrew word *teshuvah*, which signifies turning back, indicates) why are fruits required beyond repentance? For what are these fruits, if not good works performed by those who, having already turned back to God, pursue the perfect way of repentance? Upon whom, thus adapted with God, sub-

--- Page 660 ---
**VOLUME FOUR. 260**

the very spirit of God enters, making the soul fruitful to produce again the fruits of better works, which the Apostle mentions to the Galatians, saying: "But the fruit of the Spirit is charity, joy, peace, patience, kindness, modesty, continence, chastity, etc." If, therefore, faith is enumerated here as a singular fruit, and part of those things which the spirit demands from us: How is faith alone, as a sufficient means, to accomplish those things which are of the spirit? Hear these things and understand, you, who, despising others, claim for yourselves alone the knowledge of the spirit and the gospel, and consider how far you stray from the spiritual paths.

Nor do you wander astray only here, but you also extol matrimony, from which Paul exhorts those who claim to devote themselves to prayer to abstain, you despise continence, and chastity, and abstinence from carnal incitements, although you commend such things in a few words, lest you come to be despised by all: For by one word of Paul, you so commend marriages and the free use of foods, that you consider those utterly damned who observe celibacy and abstinence from foods, at least at certain times, so that, carnal incitements being somewhat removed, Christians may more freely devote the days of fasting and abstinence to God in the subsequent solemnities. Why, I ask, are you so led by one word of the Apostle, that you despise a thousand other things asserting the contrary? Does not the Apostle himself count the luxury of the flesh, and revelries, that is, unrestrained ones, among the works of the flesh, which always oppose the spirit? "Now the works of the flesh are manifest (he says, speaking to the Galatians), which are fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, luxury, dissensions, heresies, drunkenness, revelries, and such like, which I forewarn you, as I have forewarned you, that they who do such things shall not obtain the kingdom of God." Nor indeed the future kingdom to be given to those who will be on the right hand at the last judgment: Nor the present one, which by Christ's testimony is within us, yet to be acquired and increased by force brought upon ourselves, while we restrain ourselves from the delights and pleasures of the flesh: Which kingdom of heaven and of God is undoubtedly God dwelling in us, whether by grace, as many are accustomed to say, or by the light which (as John says) enlightens every man, or by a certain power and anointing, which is God Himself pouring out and anointing us with His clemency and goodness: by which He was first anointed, who by antonomasia is called "anointed" in Latin, "Christ" in Greek, and "Messiah" in Hebrew: or by whatever other name, or under whatever metaphor it may be described, the kingdom of God itself is God Himself dwelling in those who not only believe in His name, but also work according to the faith they have received, just as the heavenly teacher Himself testifies, saying: "If anyone keeps my word, my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make our dwelling with him:" For His word is not only about having faith in Him, but about love and the observance of commandments, which is a matter of works, and not of faith alone. Therefore, this kingdom of God, and God dwelling as a guest in us, we receive so much better and more fully, the more we distance ourselves from the works of the flesh, and observe celibacy, which you shamelessly despise. Hence Paul says to the Romans: "Not in revelries and drunkenness, not in lewdness..."

KK iiij

--- Page 661 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

lusts, and impurities; but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh in its lusts, delighting namely in such things, because these delights, [Marginal note: Peter] and carnal desires (as Peter says) wage war against the soul. Innumerable are such sayings of the Apostles, by which we are persuaded to fight against flesh and blood resisting the spirit: which is done through abstinence from foods, and all luxury, and through true celibacy, which you despise. But let us return to where we digressed from: Come, and hear all of you who, despising works, extol faith alone, what Christ, appointed judge of all, promises to reward, and direly [Marginal note: CHRIST] threatens, whether faith alone, or unbelief, or works themselves: For he declares that he will say these things: Come, you blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you: And inferring the reason for this reward, he says: For I was hungry, and you gave me food; I was thirsty, and you gave me drink.

--- Page 662 ---
**TONE FOUR. 261**

...[I was thirsty, and you gave me drink,] of performing works for one's neighbor: which nourishment they will hardly taste, who dwell only upon the door of faith.

**How those authorities are to be understood, which seem to attribute so much to faith. Chapter XIV.**

All those authorities, then, which the new dogmatizers have brought forward in excessive favor of faith, so that they do not obstruct the true doctrine which all right-thinking people profess, nor favor their heresy, we could prove with a single solution, saying that all those [authorities] attest to faith as necessary, as the door and beginning of salvation, and as the seed of good works, and their root: Whence all meritorious works, and those pleasing to God, are asserted by the Apostle to have been performed in faith: But the greatest teacher **[Paul]** admonishes us with an clear voice, that the word of God, which we must believe, is the seed of good works: How then do the Northern Theologians claim faith excludes works? For what is a door to us without a house, or a root and stem without fruit? What, again, is wrong with him who desires to be justified and to show himself pleasing to God by fruits, together with the root and seed? You limp, and everywhere stumbling, you fall, you who, content with only one foot, despise the other, and that most necessary one: For we wish to walk with both feet, namely of faith and charity, with a firmer step than you one-footed ones. Nor do we delight in kissing our own hand, but God's, relying on whose help we trust to undertake whatever work is destined for us: For not we alone, but the grace of God with us, imitating the Apostle, we strive to do good while we have time. And this is what we learn believing: because we are all born children of wrath, and we need not only glory, but also the grace of God, so that we may do good in the faith which we have received. Moreover, we know our prone nature, frequent falling, our weakness, and therefore what favor we need, so that we may do good. Nor should the importance of works be dismissed; indeed, we must aspire to them through the grace of Christ, who suffered for us, was raised, and by His merit always favors us: In whom we exult with inexpressible joy, obtaining the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls: And that, provided that faith itself is perfected through charity, with which the fruits of good works are produced, for which remuneration is promised. O good God, with what face, with what daring, with what (to tell the truth) rashness do these glorious more recent theologians presume to exclude works, when the royal prophet announces, the Apostle proclaims, and the Judge of all himself declares, that coming with his angels to put an end to human affairs, he will render to each one according to his works. Therefore be silent, and do not acquiesce to the spirit of error, but yield to the prophet, yield to the Apostle, yield to Christ, and to the Holy Spirit, by whom the holy men of God spoke, being inspired: Who, even if they exalted faith, nevertheless did not exclude works, except those which we do without the favor of Him who said: "Without me you can do nothing": Who to the Jews not yet initiated, and who had not yet received the seed of faith, nor had planted the root of good works, said **[GOD. / CHRI]**: "For it was the work of God,"

KK v.

--- Page 663 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

...that they should believe in him whom he had sent, who also sows the good seed of faith in the field of our soul, so that we may produce the fruit of good works: He who is the door, through which we enter into the vineyard and field of the Lord, to bring back fruit from there. And in this way he has with him universal salvation, as a door, and a seed, through which (as [Marginal note: Petrus] Peter says) we are begotten in Christ himself: which he implies, when he says: He who has believed and has been baptized will be saved: He who, as good and well-watered ground, has received the word of God, which is the seed of faith: For there are those who receive it like dry rock, believing for a time, and receding in time of temptation, because they do not have the moisture of grace, namely, irrigating grace, through which we work good. Behold then, that from this Gospel word, which you so highly value, something other than faith is sought by Christ: For the seed, by his own interpretation, is the word of God,

--- Page 664 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 262

of salvation, is salvation promised to us, how does the work pertain only to the outer man? Is it only the outer, or lower man, that is saved? Indeed, these doctrines are only persuasive to delirious old women and the common crowd, but should be persuaded to no one. But perhaps they will say: It is necessary to mortify the outer man, so that one may enter into life: We grant it: Therefore, this work is necessary, and the hand is also necessary along with the heart: But we say more, that a believing heart along with a confessing tongue does not seem sufficient, since Truth itself, and the Supreme Judge says: Not everyone who says to me, Lord, Lord, that is, believing and confessing, will enter the kingdom of heaven: but he who does the will of my Father who is in heaven. Who again declares the useless servant, and him who neglected to work, with the money received from his master, to be cast out into outer darkness, and to be anathematized by God and salvation. And that he seeks profit, he immediately declares by adding: that the least, and his members, may be fed, clothed, and such things, which are works, and not faith alone. And that they presuppose God to have commanded impossibilities, this, according to Jerome, is an anathema: But I will say more: It is impious, it is the worst blasphemy, it is to condemn God, if He commands and requires impossibilities from us, since this can be sustained by no order, no equity, no reason, that the Lord should require and desire from a servant that which is impossible: But they will say: Christ supplies by His merit and grace: Now everyone knows this, even delirious old women. Why then do you propose these things as your own inventions? For this had already been declared by Christ saying: Without me you can do nothing:
[Marginal note: CHRIST Paul]
This is confirmed by Paul, who says: Not I, but the grace of God with me. Nor can you imply anything else by the promises, as you say: for you use a new word, so that you may appear new, and by novelty be able to achieve what you pretend: but I trust in the upright spirit of Christ Jesus, that it will lead to a better outcome that which is perhaps asserted with a crooked mind: For what is it, that one cannot fulfill the law without Christ, except without the help of Christ? This we have already conceded: And when they say, One cannot approach Christ without faith, therefore faith suffices, the inference is false and incongruous, and the premise is doubtful, since Christ himself says: No one comes to me unless my Father has drawn him: Whether this drawing is faith itself, or something else, these new dogmatizers have not yet declared: For we do not doubt whether faith is necessary to approach God, because that is the clear statement of Paul, if the Epistle to the Hebrews was published by him, where he says: Without faith it is impossible to please God: For he who approaches God must believe. But that this alone is required, this we deny: For one drawn by the Father, and introduced into the house and family of Christ through the door of faith, immediately receives talents, or minas, or by whatever other name that gift may be called, so that he may immediately begin to work, and render profit from the gift received. Nor was it necessary, O new theologians, to obscure with many words a truth already manifest to all, and accepted by all, so that you might appear to have brought something new into the midst, or that you might stir up some scandal, which still from the breast

--- Page 665 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...which still from your breast you have not vomited out: For what is it to condemn works if not to pervert the whole evangelical life, and to prepare oneself with Sardanapalus and other most defiled, I will not say Epicureans, but beasts, for every kind of pleasure? For this undoubtedly follows, if they trust in faith alone, lest vigils, fasts, chastity, austerity of life, works of charity, and all celibacy be not condemned, as you do. Nor should you rely on those words, by which it was said: "Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness." For although that faith was a work of righteousness, it was not, however, righteousness alone, by which he was so pleasing to God, that so many and so great promises were made to him. Let (if you please) the book of Genesis, chapter 26, be read, and you will find these words spoken to Isaac, Abraham's son: "To you and your seed I will give all these regions, fulfilling the oath which I swore to Abraham your father, and I will multiply your seed like the stars of heaven; and I will give to your descendants all these regions, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in your seed: because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my precepts, and my commandments, and my ceremonies, and observed my law." Or, as the Hebrew truth has it, "and kept my keeping," that is, those things which I handed down to be kept: my precepts, my statutes, and my law. If, therefore, faith was sufficient, why was the observance of the law added? Why is Abraham commended now by faith, now by the observance of the law, and such a beautiful promise made to him? Not indeed because faith and works are the same, but because each presupposes or draws the other, nor can one be perfect without the other. For faith, in order to live, leads to works, and works, in turn, presuppose faith. Abraham, therefore, is commended as perfect in both, sometimes separately for faith, and sometimes for the observance of the commandments. These were revealed by God to Abraham himself no less than to Moses, although the latter, by God's own command, delivered them to the people and committed them to writing. And so Abraham kept the law, precepts, and statutes; therefore, these can be observed. Why then do you babble, saying that the law cannot be observed, and that Abraham was justified by faith alone and not by works? Search the scriptures, and adapt sentence to sentence, if you wish to perceive the truth. Indeed, Abraham's faith was credited as righteousness, and his works were also credited, because of which the blessing of all nations in his seed was promised, especially when he offered his son Isaac as a sacrifice. And even if he offered him in faith (as the Apostle says), that offering was not faith itself, but a work founded on faith, which is the foundation of the spiritual edifice.

[Marginal note: Gene. 26]

**Solution to a great difficulty, which the sayings of Paul in the Epistle**
**to the Romans. Chapter 14.**

[Marginal note: Paulus] **B**ut lest we leave anything untouched that might press us in this matter, let us come to those things which Paul, dealing with the Romans, writes in Chapter 14*, where his words seem so openly to argue for faith that they constrain more than any other things brought forward by the new dogmatizers. For he says: "If Abraham was justified by works of the law, he has glory,"

---
*Translator's Note: The original text states "Cap. XIIII" (Chapter 14), but the quoted passage "Si Abraham ex operibus legis iuſtificatus eſt, habet gloriam" is from Romans 4:2, not Romans 14. This appears to be an error in the original Latin text, as Romans 4 is the chapter that discusses Abraham's justification by faith.

--- Page 666 ---
**FOURTH TONE. 263**

but not with God: For what does scripture say? "Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness." Now to the one who works, wages are not credited as a gift, but as an obligation. But to the one who does not work, but believes in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is credited as righteousness, according to the purpose of God's grace. Therefore David also sings of the blessedness of the man to whom God [Marginal note: David] credits righteousness apart from works: "Blessed are those whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man whose sin the Lord will not count against him." And a little later: "For the promise to Abraham or to his offspring that he would be heir of the world did not come through the law. For if those who are heirs are from the law, faith is made void and the promise is abolished."

And although these words seem to favor a new doctrine, they are not alien to what the Apostle preaches as contrary in many places. For he, in whose breast Christ resonates, does not so rave as to assert one thing now and immediately begin to sing a recantation. For his discourse was to appease the Hebrews and the Romans: of whom the former trusted in circumcision and the law, while the latter trusted in uncircumcision and baptism. Hence he shows himself a most pious defender, now for the former, now for the latter. And he most fiercely opposes those things in which either the former or the latter, swelling with excessive pride, trusted.

For among them he places himself as a resolver of their questions, as Jerome rightly understands. He also tries to demonstrate that the salvation brought by the Messiah is not conferred either by circumcision, or by the law, or by works which we have done, but by the grace and munificence of God, who through his mercy and clemency sent us a savior. For we had done nothing by which we might extort or dispose God's clemency to give a redeemer, and to obtain the lamb who takes away our sins: Who by the decree of the Father was slain (as John says) [Marginal note: John] from the origin of the world for the universal salvation of all, but this was done out of God's pure grace. But for anyone to receive a portion of water and blessing from this universal abundance of salvation for his own and particular salvation, it is necessary that through faith he adhere to the one offering and bringing the saving water, so that he may drink, and by means of it, by working, grow immensely, and become in him a spring of water gushing up to eternal life. Therefore one must not stop at faith alone, but proceed further to the works which the received faith itself demands.

But if someone is unable to work, the will is counted for the deed, and in this sense that saying of the Apostle is understood: "Now to the one who does not work, but believes in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is credited as righteousness according to the purpose of God's grace," who accepts the will when there is an impossibility of working. And this is a singular grace, and a certain blessedness, according to what follows. David says blessed is the man to whom God credits righteousness apart from works: "Blessed are those whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose sins are covered." Certainly God, who wills all men to be saved, could save all, even without works, but he does not save all, because not all obey him, nor do all wish to work according to the faith [Marginal note: Paul] received, concerning whom the same Apostle says: "No one is crowned unless he competes lawfully."

--- Page 667 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

competed lawfully. And again: While we have time, let us do good, for in its own time
[Marginal note: Paul] we shall reap. Hear, O despisers of works, what the Apostle says: For he does not
say, 'let us believe and reap,' but he says, 'let us work and reap:' And this according to
the measure of works, as he says elsewhere: He who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and he who
sows in blessings will also reap from blessings, indeed, in blessings of grace granted for cooperation, as he adds: And God
is able to make all grace abound in you, so that in all things, having all sufficiency,
you may abound in every good work: And for what purpose is this good work? Not indeed,
that the body may merely be subjected to the spirit, but that we may receive a reward, if
the work which we have built upon remains, as he teaches in the first epistle to the Corin-
[Marginal note: The Same] thians: But returning to the former words of the Apostle, we confess that no one is justified by the works
of the law, nor has been justified, because the sin of the first parent, and consequently
of the entire human race, was such that it could not be removed by any human powers.

--- Page 668 ---
**VOLUME FOUR.**                      264

...according to flesh and blood: but that [salvation] which is according to God and spirit, according to which we also ought to work, since we cannot stand idle, nor ought we, being constituted children of God, to work merely according to flesh and blood. To which degree, and to obtain the reward according to it by merit (as they say) or according to a proportion of equality, to this we can never attain, but only through grace, and in geometric proportion: so that if for one, a hundred are given, for two, two hundred should be given, and for ten, a thousand are returned. Here several things are preserved, which at first glance seemed to fit poorly: For here it is preserved how the sufferings of this time, and our works, are not worthy of future glory: because those [sufferings/works] are performed by numbers [i.e., in simple units], but these [rewards] are returned by hundreds. It is also preserved how the grace of God is eternal life: since by a work which we perform in the weight or measure of one, we cannot by that one [work] attain to a remuneration to be made by a hundred, unless the grace of Him who is rich towards all who invoke Him, favors [us]. Here it is also explained how we are saved by faith, since we ought to adhere to Him who brought it about that our works, exhibited by units, are remunerated by hundreds. Finally, it is stated here that even if we are saved by grace and faith, and although our works are not worthy of future glory, yet a just judge in rewarding will render to each according to his works: because this remuneration is made in an equal proportion, with the grace of the Redeemer, promised in the law and the prophets, always intervening nonetheless: And in this sense are understood those words of Paul: "If they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect." For it is most clear to all that salvation is not given by the law, or by the blood of animals, but through Christ and the Messiah: to whom sacrifices, prophets, and the whole law correspond: and in whom it pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell, and through Him to reconcile all things. And this, provided that we take up our cross, laboring, striving, working, and doing violence to ourselves, so that we abstain from vices: and work good to the best of our ability: The rest, however, will be supplied by Him who is most full of all good things, so much so that from His fullness we all receive. This is the true doctrine preached by Christ and the Apostles in many places, sincerely proclaimed to all, and which makes all the statements uttered by the same spirit through the mouths of various [people], and published in many places, converge into one. Therefore, for this purpose, a dogma of the devil, formerly persuaded by cunning and now lulled to sleep by God's providence, is again stirred up, so that a pernicious scandal and schism may emerge: and so that the faithful may be drawn away from good works, for which life and salvation are promised.
**Paulus**

--- Page 669 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE.**

[Large decorative initial C]HRIST, made Father of all through true regeneration, and head of the mystical body, flows into all members. Fifth Tone.

How God is the father of all. Chapter I.
How Christ, regenerating us again in human nature, has been made the true Father. Chapter II.
Why faith is required of us in this regeneration. Chapter III.
Whence a male, female, or hermaphrodite is generated. Chapter IV.
Whence the likeness perfecting the image of the generator in the begotten. Chapter V.
How Christ nourishes all whom he generates. Chapter VI.
How, so that he might remove nausea, he has cooked these foods. Chapter VII.
He who begot and nourishes, also instructs us like a good father. Chapter VIII.
What doctrine he has taught us. Chapter IX.
A brief epilogue of those things which Christ taught concerning the affair of man. Chapter X.
In what gymnasium, and from what chair, he has not instructed. Chapter XI.
With what treasures Christ, like a good father, enriches us. Chapter XII.
With what private funds he has enriched his sons. Chapter XIII.
What legacy he has finally made. Chapter XIV.
To whom, and how much, he has bequeathed. Chapter XV.
With what solemnity he has celebrated this testament. Chapter XVI.
How the testament has been confirmed. Chapter XVII.
How Christ has been made not only Father, but head of all. Chapter XVIII.
How Christ, as a true head, flows into all members. Chapter XIX.
What care Christ our parent has for us, his sons whom he begot, in the provision of temporal things. Chapter XX.

--- Page 670 ---
**VOLUME FIVE. 265**
**HOW GOD IS THE FATHER OF ALL.**
**Chapter One.**

[Decorative initial Q] HOW, first, the Eternal Father, and then Christ, is also called the father of all, if we wish to explain this, it will not be inappropriate to repeat those things which are said by natural philosophers concerning the generation of every animal, especially man, since in these lower things there are likenesses and images of divine things. Therefore, Hippocrates [Hippoc.] believed that the foamy and fleshy part of the semen emanates from the brain; Aristotle [Aristo.] from the heart, which is the principal seat of the soul; Galen [Galenus] from the liver, since in it the natural digestive and generative power is situated. But Avicenna [Auicena.] declares that it flows from three principal members, namely, the heart, brain, and liver, so that he may admit the opinions and reasons of all. Some, however (as Aristotle [Aristot.] mentions), are of the opinion that the semen itself descends from every member, on both sides, because pleasure is then felt in all members; also because from any mark of any paternal member, a similar one is generated in the son, and also because in many cases, any part of the begotten is formed with the likeness of the father; whence it is inferred that semen flows from every part of the generator according to the image existing in it. Some have wished to attribute all this to strong imagination, and falsely so: both because this happens without the imagination of the generator, and also because from an excessive emission of semen, every member of the generator itself is weakened. Therefore, let others say whatever they wish for the exercise of their intellect: it seems to me that a portion of semen descends from every member, from which the son is formed with the image of the generator, which represents the whole and all the members. And thus the heart of the begotten is from the heart of the generator, the brain from the brain, the eye from the eye, the hand from the hand, and so for each one: granted that the power and spirit are especially from the brain, heart, and liver, as from the principal and more spiritual members. Therefore, descending from the brain, it draws rational power, and passing through the veins which are behind both ears, to the *mica*, to which they are connected, it proceeds through the kidneys up to the seminal vessels and testes. But proceeding from the heart and from the liver, it draws power and the spirit of love and affection. Thus also Christ, the Son of God [CHRISTVS.], the perfect image and wisdom of the Father, emanated from all things that are in the Father, drawing all things with Him, therefore He said: "All things have been delivered to me by my Father," just as He proceeded from all things. For from the essence, piety, clemency, justice, goodness, infinity, and from the whole fount of all good things, He emanated and emanates; but especially in that which is wisdom, He proceeded from the brain, that is, from the paternal mind, so that Orpheus [Orph.] and after him the Gentile theologians did not inappropriately say that Pallas, that is, true wisdom, was born from the brain of Jove. But from the heart and the innermost paternal sanctuary He drew, so that together with the Father He might produce the spirit of love. According to whose example we also were first begotten by the Eternal Father, yet through the Son, into whom the seed of ideas had been poured. Afterwards, we were again regenerated through the Son made man. For this our seminal power first
**LL**

--- Page 671 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

It comes from the brain of the paternal mind, from which is the Word and the storehouse of all created things: For in Him were conceived, as if in a seminal power, all things, whether they are in the heavens or on the earth, visible and invisible. And these are unfolded with the image or likeness of the generating Father, as their perfection demands; whence they also emanate and are derived from all that they represent. Hence, since man has the image of the father, so that he may represent all that is in the father, he is formed from all things that are in the generating parent, yet not with that perfection with which the Son is, but with a more distant and obscure image, nevertheless sufficient for this, that he may be called a son, who [Marginal note: Aristo.] ought to be similar to the generator, as Aristotle teaches in the second discourse on the soul. [Marginal note: Dauid Moses.] With all these things, therefore, the prophet, exulting with a joyful spirit, sings: "I have said, 'You are gods, and all of you are children of the Most High.'" And Moses, as if reproaching the people entrusted to him for their ingratitude, and consequently the entire human race, says: "Is He not your Father who made you, created you, and possessed you?" Concerning whom God Himself also [Marginal note: Malac.] complains in Malachi, saying: "If I am a Father, where is my honor?" And again, admonishing all mortals that they are brothers, he says: "Has not one God created us? Has not one Father created all of us?" But also our regenerator, preferring God Himself, the true Father of all, as if all others were fathers by similitude, says in the Gospel which is titled according to Matthew: "Call no man your [Marginal note: Matth. CHRISTVS.] father on earth, for one is your Father, who is in heaven." To whom also He teaches us to approach with great confidence when we pray, saying: "When you pray, say: Our Father, who art in heaven." Whom Paul also calls the Father not only of [Marginal note: Paul.] rational creatures, but of all things, when he says: "From whom all fatherhood in heaven and on earth is named."

**How Christ, regenerating us again in human nature, became a true father. Chapter II.**

[Large illuminated initial D] We have said that the son is similar to the one generating and producing. Therefore, since we have been made in the image and likeness of God, the supreme maker of all things, we are called, above all things produced by Him, sons of God. But with the image defiled and the likeness entirely lost, we were not deservedly called sons of the Most High Father, unless, being regenerated again, we reformed the dishonored [Marginal note: CHRISTVS. Nicod.] image and recovered the likeness that was entirely abolished. Therefore, He who had come to regenerate us said to Nicodemus: "You must be born anew." But Nicodemus, not understanding the mystery, said: "How can these things be? Can [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] one enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born again?" The new Father replied, teaching a new generation, affirming and declaring what He had said: "Amen, amen, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Holy Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God." He assigns water as the principle of regenera- [Marginal note: Moses.] tion, just as the waters are said by Moses to have been the principle of the primeval generation of animals, when he introduces God commanding and saying: "Let the waters bring forth, or let them teem with, a swarm of living creatures." Which also indicates the watery seed of an animal. As therefore...

--- Page 672 ---
TOMUS QUINTUS.
266

the best philosopher, and the Son of God, well-versed in the ancient generation, spoke concerning the second generation, as if conforming to the first, that it is necessary for us to be reborn from water, so that just as the first generation flowed forth from super-mundane and celestial waters, so too regeneration might proceed from the same. Therefore, in the Son of God, who is the true super-mundane water, all things were created, and in Him all things are regenerated: For He was not speaking of elemental water when He said: Unless one has been reborn from water and the [Marginal note: CHRIST] Holy Spirit: For what has this foul water to do with that holy and divine Spirit? How can these utterly diverse things agree, so as to be one principle of regeneration? Therefore, He speaks of the water which is the Son of God, who together with the Holy Spirit regenerates humans: Of whom this watery element, which is placed externally upon the head of the one to be regenerated, is a sacrament, as is this word sounding outwardly: Of these, one signifies the seed, and the other the power of propagation. And because in this regeneration, from a fiery, warming, and disposing spirit, the power of the Holy Spirit is required, therefore He Himself is also signified by a sensible voice, as if by a sacrament from the minister and to the one being regenerated, while faith and the renunciation of diabolical and worldly impediment are sought and promised, when the one to be baptized is asked by the priest: What do you ask of the Church? And do you renounce the devil, the world, and its pomps? The one to be regenerated declares that he renounces all those things, so that, with the love of inferior things removed, he may be wholly gathered by the Holy Spirit into the love of God. He also demands faith, and the gift of the Holy Spirit itself, by which one can firmly adhere to Him by whom one is generated, and be connected with Him by the same Spirit, which is called the bond and chain of love. Therefore, we are regenerated by the Son and the Holy Spirit in baptism, of which regenerating agents the signs and sacraments are water, words, and those things which are done externally: Which signify not only the effect and grace to be given, but also the regenerator himself, as the true efficient cause. But since in natural generation a generating father, a seed that is infused, and a mother receiving it are required, one might justly say here: I have a Father, who is Christ regenerating, and a seed, which is His watery power and effective seed-bed, but I do not know the mother who receives the seed. Nor am I satisfied by what is commonly said, that the Church is the spouse formed from the side of Christ sleeping on the cross, because the Church is nothing but a certain relation of aggregation, or the faithful themselves gathered: Who, since they are generated, cannot be both the generating mother and the generated sons: And even less can that aggregation or relation conceive and generate humans according to the flesh or the spirit. To this difficulty, we can respond in two ways. Firstly, just as the Eternal Father in that eternal and divine generation of the Son did not require a mother, nor in the primeval generation of the world and man, so too Christ, who regenerates us by spiritual and divine generation, does not require a mother. But if it is contended that by the voice of all the Church is called the spouse of Christ and our mother, we will say, lest there be contention where there ought not to be: The first marriage, which was between Adam and Eve, a great sacrament indeed (says [Marginal note: Paul] Paul) of Christ and the Church, teaches us how these things stand: For there
LL ij

--- Page 673 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

A woman was first a daughter, because she was taken from Adam's rib, as from material proportioned to him by a great mystery; but afterwards, as a wife formed from his rib, she bore sons. So also the first spouse of Christ, the Church—that is, the collection of Apostles—was formed into spiritual life from the rib, that is, from heartfelt love, because He chose them from the world; or from the water of grace and baptismal power flowing from the side and from the heart of Christ, especially as He slept on the cross. When these had been formed and instructed, He sent them through all parts of the world, pregnant with seed and the power of generating sons, which He provided to them when [Marginal note: CHRIST.] He said: "Go into the whole world, preach the gospel to every creature, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit." And so from them, whom He had first established as foundations and the Church, and consequently the mother of all who were to be generated, He begot the other sons of the Church. Therefore the Apost...

--- Page 674 ---
**FIFTH TONE.** **267**

And also (to bring forth something from the innermost recesses), such great diligence is required of the one being baptized, faith through the minister, so that, intent with firm adherence to those things which are performed in us, by a strong imagination through that regeneration, we may be better assimilated to the one generating us: For faith works much, which is a firm adherence and fixed intention of the cooperator in any matter, or of the one receiving the seedbed of doctrine and the health of instruction, or the generative seed. For Aristotle was of the opinion that the born child is assimilated to the one generating from the strong imagination both of the conceiving mother and of the generator himself. And Avicenna attributed so much to imagination that it operates not only on its own subject and fetus, but also often on external things, if it is intense: Into which opinion Aristotle also descended elsewhere, and with him Algazel, the wisest of the Saracens, and Galen: The first of whom proves his opinion by that which is trivial: that a woman bore an Ethiopian son from a strong imagination which she had towards a painting of an Ethiopian existing in her bedroom: Galen, however, urges that the eyes of the conceiving woman be fixed on such an image, and consequently her mind on the effigy, such as she desires the fetus to be: For if she desires a beautiful child, she should have Polycretus or Absalom before her mind, and a statue of the same before her eyes: if a valiant soldier, she should be carried away by Caesar, Alexander, Hannibal, or someone of that kind. If a philosopher is desired, she should consider Aristotle or Plato. These wise men perhaps learned from our most upright philosopher Moses, who narrates that Jacob cast rods into the troughs where the sheep drank, such as the offspring he greatly desired: white, black, or speckled. Nor is firm and certain faith, which our parent Christ demands of us not only in baptism but in whatever work we perform, anything other than a stable adherence and vehement application to Him who cooperates and gives strength, and to the work which we intend to do, so much so that it becomes in a certain way an idol in us of the virtue to be received, and of the thing to be done by us, or in us. And because this faith cannot be in an infant, hence in baptizing a non-adult, faith is required in the godparents, so that they may work in the same tender infant by disposing and cooperating with the mother—that is, the conceiving and giving birth minister—and with the principal generator Christ, by whose virtue the infant is regenerated. Therefore, this firm adherence with the generator, or principal cooperator God, or Christ Jesus, is very beneficial, so much so that Paul attributes all excellent works performed by great men to faith, as is evident in those things which he recounts in a long series with the Hebrews. But especially this faith is required in those receiving the divine seed in the field of their soul and mind, so that, wholly occupied in God through firm adherence of faith with Him, the enemy of man, coming upon them, may find no empty space where he may sow tares. For the fuller our soul's field is with divine seed, the less room is left for the enemy of the human race, who endeavors to sow tares: Therefore, not without cause is faith required, which ought to be not merely in pure credulity, but a firm and strong adherence of the mind, and a total application of the soul to the sower and regenerator.

**LL iij**
[Marginal note:] Aristo.
[Marginal note:] Avice.
[Marginal note:] Alga.
[Marginal note:] Gale.
[Marginal note:] Galen.
[Marginal note:] Moses.
[Marginal note:] Jacob.
[Marginal note:] Paul

--- Page 675 ---
: If indeed the female
11. seed prevails, a female will be conceived, more similar to the mother; if indeed, consequently,
12. equally mixed, an androgyne will be conceived. Which Plato most beautifully discusses, to our
13. mystical sense, in the Symposium: "When (he says) man adheres to the sun's
14. light, namely, and to the divine seed, he generates a male; a female, if to the earth; but an
15. androgyne, when he is mixed with the Moon." For man is sufficient for the true sun,
16. and with it he generates, when he receives the light which illuminates every man,
17. and receives the seed which better impregnates all rational minds than this one,
18. which we see shining upon the earth, impregnates the stars, like the rooster of the
19. heavens. Therefore, adhering to the Superior Sun, we become two in one spirit, as Paul says:
20. "He who adheres to God, becomes one spirit with Him." And then, having received His seed,
21. we generate an excellent work, and a male; but if someone adheres to an earthly animal,
22. and delights in the same...

--- Page 676 ---
**FIFTH TONE. 268**

Christ bringing it about, let him be male, divine, and happy, while we claim to be regenerated. He who is privy to secrets, and the messenger of the regenerating father, asks us, saying three times: "Do you renounce the devil, the world, and its pomps, so that, wholly devoted to God and adhering to Him alone, you may be happily regenerated?" He answers three times, promising namely with heart, mouth, and deed, "I renounce, I promise, and I pledge with firm adherence to dedicate myself to the regenerating Father, having removed everything else that might distract me from Him." Then, thus disposed, receiving that saving seed, he is most happily regenerated with such favor, that henceforth he cannot yield to the devil, as John says: "Everyone who has been born of God does not commit sin: for His seed is in him, and he cannot sin, because he has been born of God." [John] And again: "Everyone who has been born of God does not sin, but the generation of God preserves him, and the evil one does not touch him." [The same] And again: "Everything that has been born of God overcomes the world." And I cannot but wonder why those who reduce even the most minute points of our theology to neutral problems and questions have not discussed how John, whose testimony is true, could have truly said that one born of God overcomes the world, the devil, and sin: when we see so many regenerated in baptism who are wicked, unrighteous, entangled in sins, serving the world and the devil, indeed, made into devils, as our parent Christ said of the betrayer: "One of you is a devil," [CHRIST:] even though he, along with the other Apostles (as is fitting), had been baptized and regenerated by Christ. Here (unless I am mistaken) it must be said, I distinguish, that man is not reborn through water and the word of the priest, which are sacraments and external signs of what God works internally, but through that divine seed, as our John says: "Which (as we have said) is watery, made from that super-mundane water, [John] which is not given, nor does it remain in anyone, unless through faith he adheres to the regenerator, and, established by faith and firm adherence, preserves what he has received." By which faith, preserving that seed, he prevails over the world, the devil, and sin, as the Evangelist clearly states: "This is the victory that overcomes the world, our faith." [The same] But if someone does not adhere by faith, he indeed receives the sacrament, but not the reality or the power of it: For it is indeed given even to the unworthy, not for their benefit, but to their detriment, just as the sacrament of the body and blood was given to the betrayer at the Last Supper by Christ Himself. The same happens to those who receive that seed with faith, but believe for a time, and in time of temptation fall away from faith: which grants victory, in which the seed of God becomes fruitful, effective, and works those things that John narrates: For one is a true son of God only insofar as he adheres to God Himself in faith and firm adherence, as the same Evangelist says: "He gave the power to become children of God to those who believe in His name." [The same.] Therefore, those who fall away from faith in heart or deed are neither children, nor servants, nor friends of God and of Christ the regenerator: but they are erased from the book of children and heavenly courtiers, falling into a worse lot than if they had never been regenerated: because as violators of the oath and sacrament given in baptism, and guilty of the crime of lèse-majesté, they are to be punished with every torment. It is no wonder, therefore, if the Holy Spirit is not seen in the baptized.
LL iiij

--- Page 677 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

...nor is it felt, as in the time of the Apostles, nor is a vision of angels given, as to Tiburtius
and Valerian when baptized by Bishop Urban, nor is any victory granted
against the ancient enemy, because no one has that firm disposition
of faith and adherence which Christ and His minister demand, nor does one observe
even in the slightest those things which one promises. From this the power of the seed departs, no image of the father remaining,
and no trace, so that only the false name of Christianity remains.

Whence the likeness perfecting the image of the begetter in the begotten. Chapter V.

[Large decorative initial P] It is indeed beautiful when a son is like a good father in every
kind of likeness, which is manifold: For a son is formed according to the father's
form, first in a specific ratio arising from nature itself
in univocal generation: in which the begotten, according to species, is said to be most like the begetter,
a son. A son is also formed with the father's likeness in features,
exterior figure, voice, speech, gesture, and such things, which can arise from a strong imagination
and an "idol" existing in the heart of the begetter (as we have said):
Or from the vehement power of the seed and spirit emanating from the begetter through the
seed itself: Or it is (as some believe) from the influence of the heavens, which in some symbolic way
favor the begetter and the begotten. Furthermore, a son is assimilated to his parents in
morals, when he strives to emulate them: In all these ways, the son of Christ
can and ought to be assimilated to the Father. First, therefore, he is like Him in spiritual
generation, nature itself so demanding, as the Apostle says: "The first man is of the earth, earthly;
the second man is of heaven, heavenly. As is the earthly, so are those who are earthly; as is the
heavenly, so are those who are heavenly. Therefore, just as we have borne the image of the earthly, let us also bear
the image of the heavenly."
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br

--- Page 678 ---
TOMVS QVINTVS. 269

...we might be assimilated, as Paul says: "He gave us to be conformed to the image of His Son," [Marginal note: Paul CHRIST]
when, that is, we imitate His works, just as He Himself invites, saying: "For I have given you an example, that just as I have done, so you also should do." [Marginal note: Exodus]
Which also had been commanded earlier in the law under the type of forming the tabernacle: "Look, and make it according to the pattern which was shown to you on the mountain." For on the mountain where Christ was affixed to the cross, an example was shown to us of forming the tabernacle of our soul, similar and worthy of a host, so that He might delight to dwell in it. For although our parent Christ always presented Himself as an example to be imitated by us, He did so most especially on the cross: to which, about to ascend shortly, He invites all to imitate Him, saying: "Whoever wishes to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me." By following Him precisely, we not only [Marginal note: CHRIST]
acquire His likeness for ourselves, but we are transformed into the same image, which is the Son of God Himself, the true image of the eternal Father.

How Christ nourishes all whom He generates. Chapter VI.

[Large decorative initial N] Or would it have been enough for our most pious Father to have generated us into a spiritual man, unless He had also prepared suitable foods for him. For His care for nourishing the spiritual man was no less than for the animal man, for whom He prepared such an abundance of things. For He filled the air, the sea, and the land with animals for its food; and He fertilized it with manifold influences of the heavens, adding the nourishment of winds, dew, and rains, so that it might produce manifold and most abundant herbs and fruits for its food. It remained to prepare foods also for the better man. Hence He prepared a paradise of delight, planted with trees of many kinds, most fruitful of all fruits. Moreover, He placed the tree of life in its midst, not for the animal man, but for the better man; and near the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, good indeed for eating, beautiful to the eyes, and delightful to behold. And to water all the trees, there was a river flowing out from the place of delight, which, afterwards divided into four heads, also watered all the lower parts. Which trees, which fruits, which waters were all granted to man, except the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, which is Christ, as we have said elsewhere. Man ought neither to emulate its rank, nor be nourished by it, or by the tree of life, which is the same, until the time predetermined by the Father should arrive, when the ripened fruit would be offered to us as food. But that was when He said: "Take, and eat; this is my body," and He offered not only [Marginal note: The Same]
the fruit, but the whole tree, yet without any diminution of Himself. Yet the spiritual man was not left without food from the first man (protoplast) until Christ: for He gave sacrifices and prayers, which Abel is read to have offered first. [Marginal note: Abel.]
Then all descendants also did this by God's command, as all who are wise rightly infer: because no one would have attempted to offer sacrifices and gifts to God that were not required by God. But in the time of captivity, when no place for sacrificing was given to them, they conveniently had prayers as that food, whose care it was to nourish the spiritual man. Egref

LL v.

--- Page 679 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

But to its own divine family, after the Egyptian servitude, manna was added, indeed the food of angels, or of the strong, as is contained in the literal truth. The sacrifice was also augmented, the law given, and hymns celebrated: All these are true foods for the spiritual and better man: From which family, degenerating and enveloped in many crimes, foods were withdrawn, it itself being destined for Babylonian captivity: from which, released but not fully restored, it became quite weak until the times of Christ: In which times the most pious and generous Father regenerated it, and the whole mass of the human race, preparing a better food than that shadowy one, as He Himself [Marginal note: CHRIST] says, revealing the mystery: "Amen, amen, I say to you, Moses did not give you bread from heaven; for I am the living bread, who came down from heaven. Your fathers ate manna in the desert, and died. But I am the living bread, who came down from heaven; if anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever." Therefore, the tree and fruit of life have been granted to us, which, lest the first man touch, he was expelled from that place of pleasure; and it is offered to us to be eaten under threat of death, while it is said: "Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, which is the same as the bread of life, and drink His blood, you will not have life in you." Therefore, both Fathers were most solicitous for feeding both types of man: both He who first begot us, and He sent by Him, who regenerated us: For He said concerning the animal man: "Be not anxious for your soul, what you shall eat, or for your body, what you shall put on. Look at the birds of the air, for they neither sow nor reap nor gather into barns, and your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not of more value than they?" Why then do you distrust the Father? Why do you doubt His providence to His injury? When did you see Him neglect the care of His children? If He cares for all those things which are produced for the service of man with such great providence, so that nothing is lacking to them, why do you doubt the provision for His children? Not only did He prepare food and clothing for animals, but He descended to the still viler flowers of the field, saying: "See the lilies of the field, or the roses, how they grow: they neither toil nor spin, and yet they are clothed more beautifully than Solomon in all his glory:" because he used clothing woven with artifice and painted with adventitious colors; but the flowers, which nature prepared, put on garments and are painted with colors provided by nature, which is nobler than art: And He adds: "If the grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, God so clothes, how much more you, O you of little faith?" Therefore, taught by this teacher, we can also argue: If He feeds the body, which is to be given to worms, with so many and such exquisite feasts, how much more the spiritual man, whom He begot from His own innermost being to be assumed as co-heir of the paternal inheritance, and to be united to Him in perpetual fellowship? Therefore, for this better man, He prepared special foods sent from heaven, heavenly and divine, by eating which man himself may be made entirely divine: Which foods He enclosed under bread, flesh, and wine, as under the principal foods and drink of human life. But blood, still digested in the mother's womb, and transformed by a wonderful metamorphosis into milk for infants, and

--- Page 680 ---
TOMVS QVINTVS. 270

is administered to tender ones: But to adults and older ones, the same blood, in which is heavenly life, changed into heavenly wine, is offered to drink, according to that of the Apostle: [Marginal note: Petrus] To you as infants we offer milk: But solid food is for the perfect, of those who by practice have their senses trained for distinguishing good and evil: To which Peter assents, saying: As newborn infants, desire pure milk without guile, so that by it you may grow into salvation: because then you will be able to taste how sweet the Lord is: And thus the same drink, which is given to infants in milk for food and drink, is given to adults under wine and blood, certainly not that [blood] in which resides the bestial soul, and which cannot possess the kingdom of God, but in which resides divine life, which the spiritual and divine human ought to live: And this was prepared as a special gift at the Last Supper, when he said: [Marginal note: CHRISTVS] Drink from this, all of you: For this is my blood of the new and eternal covenant, which will be shed for you and for many for the remission of sins: by which, cleansed through him, you may live a divine life. From this it is concluded that that blood was a washing and a drink: To which drink he gave conforming bread and flesh, and these cooked by fire, so that it might remove nausea, as we will say immediately: Which bread elsewhere he called the Word, which proceeds from the mouth of God, in which he also said that man lives, and not by bread alone: Because in this [bread alone] the animal man lives, and in the Word, the spiritual [man lives]. But if by this bread is understood that life, and spiritual [life], then we can say that by this bread the spiritual life of man is sustained: in as much as it is the Word and wisdom, that intellectual part is nourished: Yet it is the same, taking on diverse properties: For the same Christ in body is bread, in divinity is the Word, in soul is blood and wine: In each, however, is the virtue of each, whence he who receives the bread also receives the virtue of the blood and of the divinity, as we are taught by the common rite of the Church, which judges that laypeople are spiritually nourished by receiving only the bread and body, as if the virtue of the blood and the divine [virtue] is contained in it: Our parent, declaring what this multi-kind food is, said: I am the living bread who came down from heaven: And again: [Marginal note: Idem] My flesh is truly food, and my blood is truly drink. He also adds the effect of eating this food, saying: He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and I in him. He also teaches that he is not only wine, but the vine from which it is born, saying: I am the true vine: And again he said: I am the truth, that is, the true Word of God, in which our inner man is nourished. Therefore, all things which pertain to this new doctrine and new food, he himself wished to express, knowing that we cannot have another teacher who might teach these things.

How, so that he might remove nausea, he cooked these foods. Chapter VII.

[Large decorative initial S] But lest the recipients should be nauseated, the most pious Father took care to cook these foods, as was observed in figurative foods by a happy omen: For when the Israelites were about to make the typical Passover, God commanded that they should roast the figurative lamb with fire. And to those offering bread in the law in-

--- Page 681 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

it was said, that they should by no means present it raw, but cooked in an oven: Therefore our Father
and greatest priest Christ, observing and fulfilling all things which were set forth in the law even
[Marginal note: JESUS] to the smallest jot, cooked all the food which he prepared in the oven of the cross with that fire,
about which he said: I came to send fire on the earth, and what do I desire, but that it may burn?
Indeed it burns, not that it may consume, but that it may cook the prepared foods [Marginal note: Jeremiah]:
that it may melt us into one: that it may instruct and transform, according to that of Jeremiah in
Lamentations: From on high he sent fire into my bones, and instructed me: or dissolved, melting,
as the truth of the letter has it: or acquired me, namely, transformed from animal to spiritual:
for חרדה (charadah) is interpreted as 'acquired' or 'dissolved'. Therefore this fire dissolves us, that it may melt
and transform us for the better, so that Lateberacensis [Marginal note: Gui. Lo.] not inappropriately exclaims to this fire,
saying: O happy flame, burning and not scorching, illuminating and not incinerating, thus all
whom you touch, loving, you transform into yourself, so that they may deservedly be called by the name of the living God:
You warmed the Apostles, and leaving all things besides you, they became sons of God: You warmed the martyrs,
and they shed blood, so that their blood, mixed with your blood, might become one thing:
You warmed the virgins, and with the fire of love they extinguished the fire of stench, so that they might become
legitimate brides to be joined to you: You warmed the confessors, and they committed themselves to harsh
prisons, so that, dedicating themselves to you alone, they might easily be united with you. Therefore every
creature lives by the benefit of this fire, so that there is no one who hides himself from its heat,
if he desires to have fellowship with God. Therefore he kindled this divine fire in cooking the prepared foods,
adding fuel of woods suitable for it: Which are figured by the woods of the cross, the true oven,
where these foods are cooked. And these woods were cedar, cypress, olive, and palm, as is commonly asserted:
The first, therefore, is cedar, ignorant of corruption, and always enduring, denoting an indefectible
affection and effect, and the goodness of fiery love, a perpetually enduring fuel: because even the good
(one) always burns with love. The cypress, smelling of fragrance, signifies his virtues, always fragrant to
purified nostrils, so that perceiving it, one may say: We run in the fragrance of your ointments [Marginal note: Origen].
For with various ointments (says Origen) God the Father anointing him, made him Christ and a physician.
He also made him a pillar of smoke from the aromatics of myrrh, and frankincense, and all the powder of the perfumer.
Delighted by these fragrances, he was inflamed with desire that he might sprinkle us with them,
[Marginal note: Paul] and make us fragrant, according to that of the Apostle: We are the good odor of Christ. Indeed we are
fragrant with odor: when we offer our works to God, and ourselves as a living sacrifice, pleasing to God,
which he receives as a sweet fragrance: And this was the fuel of warming love, by which he was kindled
to undertake the work of our redemption. The olive tree bears forth mercy and benignity, by which, ever
benevolent towards us, he is carried by ardent love. The palm, however, designates the triumph to be won over the ancient
enemy, by the love of which he was also kindled: For martyrs carry the palm as a sign of constancy
and triumph, because the more its branch is laden with fruits, the more it rises, never bending.
These, therefore, are the four woods,

--- Page 682 ---
**FIFTH TONE. 271**

which provided fuel to that divine fire, by which our redeemer, made perfect, cooked, and seasoned, was brought into the best bread and flesh to be served to us as food. Moreover, with the same fire diffused in us, like a good baker and bread-maker, he cooks us and prepares us into bread and food to be eaten by him. "I will enter (he says in Revelation) to him who opens to me, and I will sup with him, and he with me." [CHRIST] For he was made man, that he might make man God: He also made himself the food of man, that he might make man his food, and that both might dine and sup together in that last and eternal supper: in which the foods, cooked and always warmed by that divine fire, are set forth as imperishable: Where also is that new wine produced from that vine which says: "I am the true vine:" And it was pressed in the winepress of the cross [The same] by the same one who said: "I have trodden the winepress alone, and of the peoples there is no man with me." For he alone trod the wine of merit, because he alone merited the grace by which we might work well, and the reward of glory, which is given to us. Therefore, these foods, cooked by divine fire, he prepared for feeding the children begotten from those divine and most sacred loins, lest they fail. So that just as the natural man lives on bread of fine flour, barley, wheat, and this *attolaganus* (primary, secondary, or baked under ashes, and the like), with many kinds of meats, fish, fruits, and various vegetables, and is drunk with manifold wine and various liquids, so the spiritual man might be fed with bread provided from heaven, having every delight in itself, and filled with the virtue of all foods, and kneaded with the sweet blood of the true Lamb: and might be fed with flesh, in which the most excellent virtue of all flesh is contained by a certain mark, not only because it is the flesh of man surpassing all others, but because it is the flesh of the Prince, because it is immaculate flesh, an ark existing of divinity, because it is the flesh of him who is the bond of all creatures. He is also fed with milk or butter, which he who eats, knows how to refuse evil and choose good: Which milk is pressed from those exalted breasts, of which it is said in the Canticles: [Canticles] "Your breasts are better than wine:" And again: "There I will give you my breasts." Also drunk is the water of saving wisdom, offered by that guest who, journeying with us, cried out saying: "If anyone thirsts, let him come to me and drink:" And again: "Whoever drinks of this [CHRIST] water that I will give him, a fountain of water springing up into eternal life will be in him." There will also be honey, which is the taste and sweetness of sacred words and divine wisdom then most clearly manifested: Which the Prophet, perceiving somewhat in this path of pilgrimage, said: "How sweet are your words to my throat, sweeter than honey [David] to my mouth." But concerning these foods to be eaten in the heavenly nuptials, we will discuss more extensively in its proper place.

He who begot and feeds, also, like a good father, instructs us. Chapter VIII. [Eccles.]

**F** "Do you have sons (says that wise man)? Instruct them." Hence, Jesus, the wisest and best father of all, after begetting and feeding, with the greatest diligence took care to instruct us in every kind of doctrine, taught not only by words, but by deeds and examples. Of the doctrine made by word, all the gospels are full

--- Page 683 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...are, where it is recounted many times how he opened his mouth and taught, and preached in the synagogues of Galilee and Judea, so that the doctrine sown in the heart of the world might more easily be led to all the ends of the world. He also poured out upon the Apostles and disciples the promised Holy Spirit, who, bringing all things to their minds, taught them all things, so that they might spread throughout the whole world the doctrine which they had received, and lead all things to the evangelical goal and to divine wisdom, as the divine Ci- [Marginal note: David] tharœdus sang, saying: "Their sound went out into all the earth, or their line," as the true text has it, regulating all things, namely, "and their words to the ends of the earth:" or, and better according to the letter, "their sermons." Nor were there any languages in which their words were not heard, to whom it had been given in the name of JESUS our parent and teacher to speak in all tongues, so that that doctrine might be understood by all, and in confirmation that that doctrine was from the Holy Spirit- [Marginal note:

--- Page 684 ---
**TONVS QVINTVS.** [Page number:] **272**

We will strive to illuminate our eyes, adhering to the footsteps of the Evangelists, and we will hint at something about these wonderful things which are contained under the surface of the letter of both Testaments; concerning which the prophet said: *Reveal my eyes, and I will consider wonderful things from your law.* This law indeed, full of wisdom, was first given to Moses, but [Marginal note:] David by Christ transformed and brought into something better: just as if a potter would fashion the same mass, which was in the form of an ox, a ram, or a lamb, into the form of a man, with nothing added except a new form, the substance and material remaining the same. Our therefore father and teacher JESUS again subjected that law, which previously had been subjected by the blood of animals for sanctifying the animal man, as if some mass, enveloped it with his own blood, and fashioned it for sanctifying the spiritual and better man, losing nothing, leaving nothing which pertains to the substance of the law, but only changed the form and effect into a better state: and this is what he said: *One iota or one tittle will not pass from the law, until all things are done and fulfilled,* namely through the Gospel and the followers of the Gospel, which were spoken in the law. Indeed, iota is the smallest letter of the alphabet, from which (says [Marginal note:] CHRIST. Jerome) it is shown that those things which are considered least in the law are full

--- Page 685 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

the authority of absolving, and the imposition of hands, and concerning the resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment: All these things are contained in the outer shell of the Gospel, and are discussed by scholastic theologians daily in schools, and are reduced to problems for debate: But among the perfect (as Paul hints in the same place), these things pertaining to a better wisdom are discussed: Which is a heavenly gift, and hidden manna, which no one knows except he who receives it, therefore it is not to be discussed, except among the experienced: because others cannot grasp it: Moreover, how man is a partaker of the spirit of God, and one and the same with Him: How also the good and better word of God is tasted than that which sounds outwardly to the ears, and is disseminated to the common people in parables, according to that saying of our teacher to the more intimate disciples: **[Marginal note: CHRI STVS]** To you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God, but to others in parables: What, moreover, are the virtues of the future age, and of the happiness which we await, which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has entered into the heart of man, unless one has been lifted up by the power of the Holy Spirit to know those things which man cannot investigate by his own strength, as Isaiah cautiously speaks, saying: **[Marginal note: Isaias]** God will not see without you what you have prepared for those who love you: Nevertheless, these things were shown to the first parent, while he existed in the paradise of delight, which more intimate theologians, together with Paul, call the future age, that is, to be restored to us, who have lost it: **[Marginal note: Theolo. Paulus]** From these depends perfect knowledge concerning the origin and end of the soul, concerning angelic spirits, concerning the condition and quality of that immense glory, concerning the nature of that paradise of delight described entirely under metaphors: All these things are included in the marrow and kernel of the Gospel: To these he comes, who knows how to remove the bark and break the kernel: Of this kind was he who said: But we, with unveiled face, beholding the glory of the Lord. **[Marginal note: Idem.]** But this doctrine, which is not committed to letters or words, no one knows except he who receives it by a special gift, leaving it to be discussed among the perfect, and those who have tasted it, we will run through something of that doctrine which can be revealed, and especially what our teacher Christ taught concerning the condition of man better than all the wise men of the world.

**A BRIEF EPILOGUE CONCERNING THOSE THINGS WHICH CHRIST TAUGHT CONCERNING THE MATTER OF MAN. CHAPTER X.**

Various things concerning man have been established by the wise men of the world, especially by those who are now at hand, touched upon but not decided, but most clearly defined by Christ: Who we are: From where we come: Where we dwell: Whither we tend: By what way. What man is, this alone we have determined by the Peripatetics, that he is an animal, and this a rational one, **[Marginal note: Peripate.]** produced by man and by the sun: But by the Academics (as they had deduced from the prophetic **[Marginal note: Academ.]** workshop) it is added, that beyond animal and reason, there is something divine in man, which Plotinus names intellect, or intellectual light, **[Marginal note: Plotinus]** by means of which we can know God, and do good pleasing to God Himself: Which

--- Page 686 ---
TONUS QUINTUS. 273

And Pythagoras draws from the same workshop, saying in golden words: "Trust, [Marginal note: Pythag]
because a divine nature is inherent in humans." But Christ, transcending further, taught
that we are sons of God, while he commends the prophet, who had said: "I said, 'You are gods,
and all of you sons of the Most High.'" But because we fell from this dignity, so much so [Marginal note: David]
that no trace of it remained in us, nor was anyone found who could either teach
or know anything about it, JESUS our teacher not only taught, but gave
power (says John) that we might become sons of God, by mortifying the flesh and blood, [Marginal note: John.]
which had torn us away from that dignity: Who also elsewhere, exulting, says: "See what kind [Marginal note: Idem.]
of love God has given us, namely through Christ, that we should be called sons of God,
and be so." He taught again, that we might become sons of God through sweet harmony with Him,
saying: "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God." Which peace is certainly [Marginal note: CHRISTUS.]
not that of Octavian, or that which the world desires, so that everyone may more securely
possess their goods without robbers or assassins: but that which we ought to have with God:
which consists in complete harmony and concord with Him: so that we desire nothing,
accomplish nothing, except insofar as it is pleasing to Him, vices and concupiscences being completely overcome,
enemies vanquished, and affections pacified: Which to do we neither
knew nor were able, except through JESUS Christ our father and teacher,
Paul saying: "But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through JESUS [Marginal note: Paul]
Christ our Lord." Which peace and victory stands with all manner of external war,
persecution, and martyrdom: In which, being tormented, Vincent said: [Marginal note: Vincent.]
"I am carried on high, therefore I do not fear your torments." He taught moreover that the human condition
is finally to be assimilated to the angelic, while he says: "And they will be in heaven, like the angels [Marginal note: CHRISTUS.]
of God," perhaps not only with greater similarity, but with identity, than is supposed. He
also declared the value of the soul, while he preferred it to the whole world, saying: "What does it
profit a man if he gains the whole world, but suffers the loss of his own soul?"
All these things, and similar ones, if anyone has well considered them, will understand them defined concerning
the human condition, which the wise men of this world least of all declared. The second is:
Where we come from: Which we cannot learn from Aristotle, since he does not determine whence [Marginal note: Aristo.]
the rational soul emerges, whether from the very bosom of matter, or whether it comes from outside, but
speaks doubtfully and hesitantly, saying: "If there is any form coming from outside, [Marginal note: Pythag.]
that is the intellective soul." But Pythagoras, from the aforementioned workshop (Alexander [Marginal note: Alexan.]
and Laërtius relating), brought forth something more celebrated, saying: "The soul is immor [Marginal note: Laërtius.]
tal, since that from which it was torn away is indeed immortal." Where he professes two things:
One, that the soul is immortal; The other, that it emanated from God: both of which
are left doubtful by Aristotle, because he did not care to learn from the heavenly school,
whence all truth comes: in which Christ, taught above all others, openly instructs [Marginal note: CHRISTUS.]
us as begotten by God, while he teaches that we should turn to God with great confidence, calling
Him Father, as He is; indeed, that we should acknowledge no other father, while he says:
"Call no man your father on earth: for one is your Father, who is in heaven." And
concerning himself he says: "I came forth from the Father and have come into the world." But since we are brothers rather from
MM

--- Page 687 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

...Father, than from mother, and we without doubt came forth from the same, yet not with the same perfection and degree: Which we know least, thus the sin of our first parents overshadowing us, whence we fall into the penalty of ignorance or oblivion: Therefore
[Marginal note: Poets / Theologians of the Gentiles] the ancient Poets and Theologians of the Gentiles fabricated that we drank from the stream of Lethe.
[Marginal note: Philosophers] Third is where we dwell: Concerning which natural Philosophers still wander, whether this is our homeland, where we can attain the acquired intellect, in which (as they opine) we can be blessed, or whether this place is a temporary lodging for our pilgrimage,
[Marginal note: Peripatetics / Brahmins / Academics] and whether this is a friendly or hostile dwelling: Concerning which, what the Peripatetics thought, I have not yet explored: But the Brahmins and Academics, scenting something of the divine
[Marginal note: Didymus] doctrine which Christ had come to explain, put forth such things as these: "We are not (says their king Didymus) inhabitants of this world, but sojourners." And the Academics, following their Plato, confess other dwellings as much for those who have deserved well, as for those who have deserved ill, as
[Marginal note: Plato / Mercury / Chalcidius] Plato himself expressly discusses in the Phaedo. Mercury also, taught by his Pymander and elevated in mind, while dying (as Chalcidius relates) said: "Hitherto, my son, driven from my homeland, I have lived as a wanderer and an exile: but now I seek my homeland again: And when I have departed a little, freed from bodily chains from you, see to it that you do not mourn me as if dead: for I am returning to that best and blessed city, to which all citizens will come at the summons of death." But our teacher Christ, how this
[Marginal note: CHRIST] world we inhabit relates to us, openly declared before all, saying: "I bear witness concerning the world, that its works are evil:" And again: "If the world hates you, know that it hated me before you." And many such things he touches upon, from which we know that the world, and this lodging in which we sojourn, is our
[Marginal note: James / John] most bitter enemy: Whom James and John followed, saying: "Whoever wishes to be a friend of this world will be made an enemy of God." But John, with paternal charity, gently admonishes us, saying: "Little children, do not love the world, nor the things that are in the world, because in it there are nothing but all things hostile to us: the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life." Furthermore, our teacher and Father showed, more by deeds than by words, that this is not our homeland, but a temporary lodging for pilgrimage, while he presented himself as a stranger to his disciples, in whose person the prophet says:
[Marginal note: David] "I am a sojourner and a pilgrim, like all my fathers." Hence it is concluded that the world is not to be loved, just as temporary lodgings for pilgrimage are not; indeed, we must most cautiously take heed, lest we be plundered, wasted, and wounded. Fourth, which is more wondrous, because although we continually wander, none of the wise of this world has declared where we are hastening, except those who
[Marginal note: Pythagoras] learned from divine oracles, such as Pythagoras, whose saying, reduced to verse, echoes this: "When, having laid aside the body, you go free to the heavens, you will escape man,
[Marginal note: Plato] made a god of the nourishing ether." With whom Plato, imbued with the same discipline, says in the Phaedo: "Those who are found to have lived more piously than others, these, freed from these earthly places as if from a prison, ascend to higher realms, and inhabit a pure region above the earth—

--- Page 688 ---
**VOLUME FIVE.**
**274**

region, where the reward is beautiful, and the hope immense. But our teacher Jesus teaches us concerning this open discourse, while he says: This is eternal life, that they may know you, God the Father, and him whom you have sent, your son: Since this knowledge cannot be had in this pilgrimage, he declared when it would be had, saying: When the Son of **[CHRIST]** Man comes in the seat of his majesty, all nations will be gathered before him: when these have been separated, he will say to those who will be at his right hand: Come, you blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: In which kingdom there will be a clear vision of the Father and the Creator: there will be the enjoyment of all good things: finally, there will be a state perfected by the aggregation of all good things, which is the state of true blessedness: But which of the Philosophers ever declared that a kingdom was prepared for us? Who would have dared to ask for it, or to hope for it, unless the Lord of that very kingdom had declared and promised it? Who again declared that we are invited to that kingdom, as if to a wedding, unless our teacher, as is clear in the parable of the wedding? Lastly, and what is the most difficult of all, by what way one must proceed to that end: There is no one (**[Baruch]** says Baruch) who can know the way to that kingdom: nor is there anyone who can devise its paths: Neither the giants, who were of great stature from the beginning, and men of renown: Nor any of the princes of this world, who are destroyed: Nor any of the philosophers, although in seeking they may have consumed their age and time (as **[Lactan.]** Lactantius discusses in a long discourse) and at the same time lost their industry, until this our teacher and Father was seen on earth, and conversed with men: Who not only taught, but made himself the way, not, I say, that of precepts, by which David ran with his heart enlarged, nor merely that of virtues, although he taught it in its entirety most fully, but he made himself the way and the staff, leaning on which we might proceed to the Father, not only sustaining, but leading, drawing, and carrying, as we are taught in the parable of the lost sheep, carried on the shepherd's shoulders: under whose person **[Augusti]** Augustine, disputing against five heresies, says: When you were an enemy to my Father, I reconciled you: When you wandered among mountains and forests, I sought you: among the stones and wood which you adored, I found you: I carried you on my shoulders to the Father, to whom I restored you. He also took upon himself all the burdens of our sins, so that, unburdened, we might proceed more easily, or be carried. He also taught how we ought to be renewed and transformed, so that, made lighter, we might not fail in the highest and most difficult journey, and lest, appearing in the form of a beast, which we had assumed through sin, we should be expelled from that court of minds and intellectual spirits much more severely than he is said to be cast out from the wedding who did not have a wedding garment. The beginning of this transformation occurs through the sacramental seed, by which we are conceived in baptism, and are reborn according to the spirit: But through resurrection we receive the completion of perfect regeneration, concerning which it is said: In the regeneration, when the Son of Man sits on the throne of his majesty with his angels, you, namely the Apostles, will sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel: But all others, who have left house, brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or children,

**MM ij**

--- Page 689 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

or fields, they will receive a hundredfold, and will possess eternal life. For who before him had a discourse concerning this regeneration, or thought it up? Of which regenera-
[Marginal note: Paul] tion, which occurs in the resurrection, he himself was the beginning and the way, as Paul says: Christ has risen from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep, for since by man came death, and by man came also the resurrection of the dead: And just as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all will be made alive. And this is the true way of life, which our
[Marginal note: David] teacher Christ taught, as the prophet had foretold: You have made known to me the ways of
[Marginal note: Ambrose] life, which (says Ambrose) were previously unknown: Foreseeing him in spirit,
[Marginal note: Isaiah] Isaiah joyfully says: Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, that mountain indeed raised above the tops of the mountains, and above all hills, that is, above all those sublime in power, wisdom, and holiness, and to the house of the God of Jacob, from which our Teacher JESUS came forth according to the flesh, and he will teach us his ways: and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion will go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, The law indeed recently subdued (as we said) and the word of the Lord, which became flesh, and taught us especially in the temple, which is in Jerusalem, and on the cross fixed before its gate.

In what gymnasium, and from what chair he instructed us. Chapter XI.

[An illuminated initial 'E' containing a figure of a seated scholar or saint at a desk]
AND although this Father and our Teacher taught us in the temple, on the mountains, in the synagogues of Galilee, and in various places, nevertheless, he delivered the whole sum of doctrine, and more effectively, on the cross, so that
[Marginal note: Augustine. Paul] Augustine rightly says: The cross of the suffering Christ was the chair of the teaching master. Which he also knew, who said to the Corinthians: I determined not to know anything among you except Jesus Christ, and him crucified: because placed on the cross he gave us all kinds of doctrine: which, running through superficially, we will say, that beginning from the elements of a better and mystical grammar, he led us up to the highest peaks of the deepest theology, leaving no intermediate doctrine untouched. For first he taught the eternal Word to agree with that name, which
[Marginal note: The same.] is above every name, given to him indeed through the power of the cross, if Paul teaches truly: who concerning this incarnate Word, who is called Christ, says: He became obedient for us even unto death, and that the death of the cross: therefore God also highly exalted him: and gave him a name which is above every name, that at the name of JESUS every knee should bow, of those in heaven, on earth, and under the earth: The power of this name, even if it was given on the cross, yet by virtue of the divine word united with and pervading this name JESUS, and the name itself, so much so that by antonomasia he is called Messiah and Christ, that is, anointed above all his companions. From this he also taught the participle, that is, the portion taken from both natures, by which Christ himself is constituted. He also explained another participle on the cross, while he shared with us grace, glory, and merit, which he acquired in it, so that he might make us partakers of himself, and unite us with him. The true pronoun is that surname Christ, which we use in place of the name JESUS, and we are called Christians from Christ, just as we ought to be called Je-

--- Page 690 ---
**TONVS QVINTVS.**
**275**

-suan from Jesus: Or let us say that even if Jesus is a noun, it can nevertheless be a pronoun, because it stands for us in place of the great name of God, which could not be expressed until the work of the cross was demanded: in which (as we said) power was given to this name, which we invoke in place of the great name of God, as we declared above. Moreover, he taught the preposition, by handing over his name to be placed before all our works, just as Paul expressed, saying: "Whatever you do, do it in the name of our Lord [Marginal note: Paulus] Jesus Christ." He also taught us to place the cross to be followed first, saying: "Whoever [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] wishes to come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross, and follow me," I who am to be affixed to the cross, offering it to you as a staff and a guiding sign to be set forth in all works. He also explained the adverb, namely the mother standing next to the Word, when he said to the disciple, and consequently to all of us: "Behold your mother, whom I leave in my place, so that through her mediation: [Marginal note: Iedra] who stands continually next to me and before the face of the Father, you may obtain from the Father and from me whatever you wish." Therefore, the disciple then, in his own name and in the name of all of us, received her into his protection and as a refuge for Christ, and together with Him. But he also taught us to make the greatest interjections, providing a source from which we may utter sighs and all expressions of sorrow. Finally, that conjunction for which we were all instituted, namely with God making us blessed: For, sensing what he was soon to do on the cross, so that it might work more effectively, after the Last Supper he prayed to the Father, saying: "I ask, Father, that just as I and you are one, so also may these be one [Marginal note: Ibidem] in you." Indeed, he instructed us in a better logic than Aristotle, since we know how to discern truth from falsehood much more clearly through it than through this [logic] by which young people are instructed in schools and Peripatetic gymnasiums: For in the doctrine of the cross (if anyone wishes to consider it well) without doubt one will distinguish between true and false, just and unjust: For in it, man becomes spiritual, and consequently (as Paul teaches) judges all things: There, true milk and butter are eaten, so that everyone [Marginal note: Paulus] may know how to reject evil and falsehood, and choose good and truth. He also taught the highest Rhetoric, indeed he attributed all efficacy to prayer, by meriting, and he became the means through whom we obtain all things from the Father: For this name JESUS (in which we are taught to ask for whatever we desire) had (as we said a little earlier) its efficacy from the cross, from which it acquired that name which is above every name. He also offered two most pleasing things to reconcile the listener, the Father, in whose presence we must always pray: The first is the diligent care we must have, that a pure and clean soul be presented to God the Father, from whom we received it, which he taught to achieve by deed, when he said: "Father, into your hands I commend my spirit." The second is the love of enemies, in which he offered himself as an example to be imitated with singular efficacy, saying: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do," excusing them on account of ignorance. Moreover, coming to the prayer made for us, he offered [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] (says Paul) prayers with tears and a strong cry, instructing us, [Marginal note: Paulus] that we do the same when praying, namely with the cry of the heart, more than of the mouth. Nor Arithme-
**MM iij**

--- Page 691 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...nor did he omit arithmetic, but taught it profoundly, while he strove to lead the multitude, which emanated from one, back to that same one principle (CHRIST.), in that which he said: "When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all things to myself," from which they emanated. But he also taught to multiply, when he instructed us to join our few merits with his most abundant ones, so that due proportion might be found. He also taught to divide the soul, namely, from the spirit by the spiritual sword, which is the word of God entrusted to us, and having efficacy especially through the cross and Christ crucified. He also demonstrated how to subtract debts from our merits, so that it might be seen what fruits remained from our works. In Geometry, moreover, he taught that which all labor in vain and to no purpose to find, namely, how the circle is squared: And this, while he squared the intellectual sphere and of the divine nature in the body of the fourfold element, offering also to us the same squared elements, from which we might be able to converge with that divine sphere. And this is the only way, that we be pressed under the winepress of the cross, and from being square-shaped and corporeal, we may become spherical and divine: For a sphere cannot rightly be given from a square or a cube, unless that square-shaped figure is resolved and reduced to a circle: Therefore, it is necessary that this corruptible, and quadrangular, or fourfold body be dissolved by the cross, to be mortified, if it ought (Paul) to become spherical and divine by putting on (as Paul says) incorruption, and immortality, and that only-begotten and spiritual nature: For through the cross he gave us the power to become children of God, by mortifying the very flesh and blood, and by being reborn through the virtue of Christ suffering, as we said above. He added music, teaching it, and sounding with the drum of his body extended on the cross, with the soul beating, and the spirit resounding with such sweetness, that far better than of Orpheus, it is said to draw to himself even those most distant in all parts of the world: For he brought harmony and concord there, reconciling all lower things with heavenly things, (The same.) pacifying all things through the blood of his cross, as Paul says. Which to no one before or after was given to accomplish. Moreover, he taught true and better astrology, effectively producing and spreading heavenly and divine influences into all of us. Indeed, he opened himself as the true heaven, so that from his most abundant graces he might pour forth into all of us. He also expounded true philosophy, which teaches to abstract intellectual and spiritual things from sensible things, while he taught to despise these, and to desire those: (The same.) To which teacher Paul invites us, saying: "Let us run to meet [him], engaging in a struggle against ourselves, looking to Jesus, the author of faith and its finisher," who, having put aside the joy for himself, namely worldly and sensible, he endured the cross, despising the ignominy which followed from it, so that he might possess heavenly and divine delights. Moreover

--- Page 692 ---
TONVS QVINTVS. 276
Fifth Tone. 276

e: For there he openly showed charity above all charity, and love, exposing his body and soul for his friends: There humility, when he humbled himself even to the extreme degree of ignominy: There obedience, having been made obedient even unto death, even the death of the cross: There faith, when about to ascend the cross he said to his disciples: Believe in God, and believe in me, who am the author, and [CHRIST.] consummator of faith: There patience, and hope of future good things, when provoked by innumerable and immense injuries, he stood like a lamb before him who shears it, and did not open his mouth. But finally he taught the highest peak of Theology, while he completed all things which are contained in all sacred scripture, namely in the law and the prophets, so much so, that when all things were rightly perfected, he exclaimed with a loud voice saying: It is finished [The same.] and completed, namely everything that was written about me, and about the redemption of the human race, and about the unbarring of the heavenly gate, and about all things which lead man, and consequently every creature, to its proper end. All these things lie hidden from those who do not have their inner senses exercised in the knowledge of truth. But to those who have their eyes enlightened, they are manifest, just as the Apostle said: [Paul.] We preach Christ crucified, indeed a stumbling block to the Jews, but foolishness to the Gentiles, but to those who are called and enlightened, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God: Because what is foolish of God, is wiser than men: and what is weak of God, is stronger than men: who greatly value wisdom and doctrines devised by human ingenuity, which are nothing before God. For the lowest degree of divine wisdom, which is considered a kind of foolishness, is greater than all wisdom of the world, so much so, that in every degree of its wisdom the wise of the world are lost, as it is written in Isaiah, and cited by Paul: I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the prudence [Isaiah. Paul] of the prudent I will reject: Where is the wise, where is the scribe, where is the disputer of this age, who understands the mystery of the cross? For there are the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden, wisdom indeed not of this age, nor of the rulers of this world, which is destroyed, but it is wisdom hidden in a mystery, which God predestined before the ages for our glory, which none of the rulers of this age knew: To perceive which, God often chose the foolish of this world, to confound the wise, and the weak, to confound the strong, and the ignoble of the world and the contemptible he chose, and those things which are not, namely in the sight of men, or those things which are not, so that he might make, and destroy those things which are, and no flesh may glory in his sight: Who constituted Christ JESUS for us wisdom, justice, sanctification, and redemption, so that he who boasts that he knows, or can do anything, may boast in the Lord Christ JESUS, who is true wisdom, a true teacher, and administering all things to us: Who taught his elect not in a long space of time, nor with so many vigils and assiduous labors, as young men are accustomed to learn the doctrines of the Gentiles, but by the sole anointing of the Holy Spirit he instructed them in all things, as he promised saying: He will suggest all things to you, and will teach you all things: And John in his epistle: [CHRIST. John] You have an anointing from the Holy One, and you know all things: And again: You have no need
MM iij

--- Page 693 ---
...you do not need anyone to teach you, but just as His anointing teaches you about all things, so it is true. Nor is there any doubt about the teacher and His doctrine, because there is no lie in Him.

**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

**With what treasures, as a good father, Christ enriches us. Chapter XII.**

[Marginal note: M. Var.] [Large decorated initial N] It would not have been enough for our parent to have begotten us, and continuously nourished and instructed us, unless he also made us rich and provided for us in all things. For riches are so called (as Marcus Varro and other grammarians teach) because they make us divine, and in need of nothing, just as God is: To this state true riches lead us. But such a great error has grown among men, that they think they make themselves rich in those things which are dedicated to the lower kingdoms as dregs and refuse. For Pluto, the anti-god, also has his riches dug out of the earth, from which he is called Dis, because he is always twice rich in earthly things, as [Marginal note: Claudi.] Pluto himself says in Claudian: "and we always hold what the gods above once held." This Pluto (as we have said) is called Mammon by the Savior, as are the riches he possesses: These riches are opposed to true riches, just as their prince Mammon is opposed to our true Father, who is rich not only for Himself, but for all others, as [Marginal note: Paulus] the Apostle says: "Rich unto all who call upon Him." And so great is the difference between them, that no one can serve both, as our supreme teacher [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] Himself testifies, saying: "You cannot serve God and mammon," which are opposed as truth and falsehood. And therefore He admonishes us to despise false riches and seek true ones: "Do not (He says) store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where rust and moth destroy, and where thieves dig through and steal; but store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither rust nor moth destroys, and where thieves neither dig through nor steal." These treasures and riches are accumulated from many possessions.

For [Marginal note: Paulus] there is a treasure of grace, concerning which the Apostle says to the Ephesians: "We have the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of His grace, which abounded in us:" And again: "God, who is rich in mercy, because of His great love with which He loved us, made us alive together with Christ, by whose grace you have been saved: and He raised us up together, and made us ascend into the heavenly places, in Christ Jesus, that in the ages to come He might show the abundant riches of His grace in His kindness toward us." And not without reason does the Apostle mix together the riches of God's mercy, grace, and goodness: because all those things come from the same super-mundane treasury. [Marginal note: Idem.] There is also a treasure of wisdom, as he says to the Colossians: "In Christ are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge," communicated to His friends, as he says addressing the Corinthians: "You were made rich in Him in all speech and in all knowledge:" He declares to the Ephesians that these treasures were entrusted to him to dispense, when he says: "To me, the very least of all saints, this grace was given, to preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make all see what is the dispensation of the mystery which for ages has been hidden in God, who created all things: so that now through the church the manifold wisdom of God might be made known to the principalities and powers in the heavenly places according to the pre-

--- Page 694 ---
TOMVS QVINTVS. 277

the plan for the ages, which He accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord. For these
riches were hidden in God through all past ages, until they were revealed through Christ
and entrusted to the Apostles to be dispensed: Paul, wishing to distribute these with all
reverence, adds: "For this reason I bend my knees to God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ:" [Marginal note: Paulus.] from whom, as from the measure, and standard, and origin of all fatherhoods,
every fatherhood in heaven and on earth is named. For there is no father who was not
first begotten by the Supreme Father, and from Him received the fruitfulness from which
he can become a father. "Therefore, I ask Him," [Marginal note: Idem] says Paul, "that He may grant you,
according to the riches of His glory (which, namely, I dispense), to be strengthened by His
Spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell through faith in your hearts, rooted and
grounded in love, that you may be able to comprehend with all the saints what is the
length, and breadth, and height, and depth" – namely, of the wisdom of God – "and to
know the surpassing love of Christ," in which, namely, He was most rich, so that from His
fullness He may be able to bestow upon all, whence follows: "That you may be filled with
all the fullness of God." He is also most rich in glory, as the same witness, speaking with
the same people, declares: "I pray continually in my prayers, that the eyes of your heart
being enlightened, you may know what is the hope of His calling, and what are the riches
of the glory of His inheritance:" And again: "May He grant you to be strengthened by the
Spirit in the inner man, [Marginal note: Paulus] according to the riches of His glory:" Without these riches of
Christ, although we may possess inferior and earthly things, we are most poor, as He
Himself openly intimates, saying: "You say, 'I am rich, and have become wealthy, and have
need of nothing,' [Marginal note: Apocal.] and you do not know that you are wretched, and miserable, and blind,
and naked." "I counsel you therefore to buy from Me gold refined by fire, that you may
become rich according to true riches." And again in the Gospel, which is titled according
to Luke: [Marginal note: Lucas.] "Make for yourselves purses which do not grow old, and a treasure unfailing
in the heavens," a place indeed full of true riches, as the divine Psalmist sings: "Glory and
riches are in His house."

With what special property He has enriched His daughters. Chapter XIII.

[Decorative initial N] Or is this Father of ours content to have sons, but He also wishes to
have daughters, so that the due harmony of nature may be completed by both
sexes, just as He Himself is (as Mercury testifies) [Marginal note: Mercur.] endowed with the fruitfulness
of both sexes: We are these daughters, who are sometimes called His sons,
soldiers, and ministers, sometimes daughters and brides, as we read in the Song
of Songs: [Marginal note: Canticis.] "Go forth, and see, O daughters of Zion, King Solomon with the diadem
with which his mother crowned him on the day of his espousals," when, namely, he took
many brides, as it is said a little further on: "There are sixty queens, and eighty
concubines, [Marginal note: Ibidem] and virgins without number." All, indeed, described by a great mystery

--- Page 695 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

his entire assembly at once, bride, and daughter, or son, just as the same form is called 'animus' and 'anima' in both sexes for diverse reasons even among grammarians, just as we also have it said in scripture, before woman was produced, "He created them male and female," that is, he created humanity rejoicing in both sexes,
[Marginal notes: Mercur. Plato. Isaias]
as Mercury touches upon in the Pymander, and Plato explains more seriously in the Symposium: And this, because sometimes, like a woman, it receives seed and becomes pregnant, according to that of Isaiah: "From your face, O Lord, we have conceived and given birth:" But sometimes, acting manfully, it impregnates others with the disseminated seed of the word of God. There are also those who say that 'anima' is that by which we live, receiving life from above, and 'animus' is that by which we are wise, namely, to return to Him from whom we came. Therefore, while we are sons, we are enriched by the Father and endowed with an inheritance: but while we exist as daughters, we are dowered by the same Parent, who is Father and Spouse, just as the first man was father

--- Page 696 ---
**FIFTH TONE. 278**

it is nevertheless deposited in a safe place, to be assigned immediately when we have fulfilled the testament: Of which matter Peter, Paul, John, and the others who saw it and testified are guarantors: [marginal note: Petrus] the first of whom says: Blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord JESUS Christ, who has regenerated us into an incorruptible inheritance preserved in the heavens, ready to be revealed in the last time, in which you will rejoice: But for a little while now it is necessary to be saddened by various temptations, so that the proof of your faith may be much more precious than gold, which is tested by fire. And for so long it is necessary for us to be under guardians and administrators, under the servitude of precepts, until (says Paul) we become a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: [marginal note: Paulus.] so that we may no longer be wavering children, and tossed about by every wind, but joined together and firm through every joint, and to the measure of each member corresponding to divine precepts, as has been declared elsewhere. If, however, there are any who are not yet adult, Christ will supply, as such a great inheritance to be possessed demands. John [marginal note: Ioannes.] also twice testifies, saying: We saw his glory, glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. From whose fullness we have all received, so that we may be made co-heirs of that only begotten of the Most High Father.

**To whom, and how much he bequeathed. Chapter XV.**

**C**onsequently, since these things which happen in civil matters are consonant with divine and heavenly things, and one commonwealth is the image of the other, we can most aptly learn divine things from those things which are familiar to us. A civil testator can bequeath many things to many people, if however an heir has been instituted, by whom the hereditary legacies (as jurists assert) are owed. In a similar way Christ brought it about, as Ambrose well discusses, saying: The Author of piety, [marginal note: Ambroſ.] hanging on the cross, made a testament, distributing works of piety to individuals: to the Father his spirit, to the Virgin the Paranymph, to Nicodemus the body to be delivered to the earth, to the Apostles persecution, to the Sinner hell, to penitent Christians the cross; to the Thief paradise; and to all faithful children the inheritance of eternal life: Of which it is not given to speak, since those who saw it themselves protest

--- Page 697 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...divine excellence of the content is so great, that in its own form all things may be called shadowy by reason of the singular excellence which they have in the fount of all good things: For in His right hand are eternal delights, for which we have [them] even unto the end.
[Marginal note: David] These things the royal prophet foresaw, when, inspired by the prophetic spirit, he sang: "You will fill me with joy with your countenance, when indeed you show me your face, you will fill me with joy, giving from the eternal delights which are in your right hand." But lest we should doubt concerning this glorious inheritance, He showed it beforehand, both before He made His testament, and after: Indeed, before it, He showed it to three Apostles: from whom
[Marginal note: Peter] Peter says: "We heard, when we were with Him on the holy mountain, a voice of this kind brought from the magnificent glory, 'This is my beloved Son:'" Whose face they saw shining like the sun, and His garments white like snow from the glory, into which state He had been transfigured.
[Marginal note: John] John also says: "We saw His glory:" And again: "That which we have heard, and seen with our eyes, and touched with our hands, concerning the word of life, we declare to you." But after the testament was made, He showed that very glory to Stephen the protomartyr,
[Marginal note: Luke. Steph. a.] Luke testifying

--- Page 698 ---
**VOLUME FIVE.** 279

in lies and deceit, since he can give nothing but punishment, sorrow, horror, darkness,
and things of this kind, which man by nature itself abhors: Therefore it is necessary that he
entice those whom he draws to himself with some falsehood. He offers pleasures, therefore, as enticements for his
fraud, so that mortals, allured by those charms which cannot possess the kingdom of God,
may be torn away and diverted from that kingdom and inheritance from which he himself was expelled:
Which was prepared for us from the foundation of the world, and bequeathed in the most celebrated
testament of the Son of God.

**With what solemnity he celebrated this testament. Chapter XVI.**

[Decorative initial I, depicting a seated figure, possibly a judge or scholar, with others standing nearby] N the solemnity of a testament, it is required (as jurists say, or as
is customary) that there be a competent testator, of sound and healthy mind, a notary having
authority, witnesses, and heirs. The testator was Christ, the Son
of the eternal Father, long since constituted heir of all things with the
fullest authority to make a will, to bequeath, and to appoint heirs, with such a division of assets
as shall seem fitting to each (by the judgment of the best Father). Concerning this testament,
it was indeed foretold in the oracle of Baruch the prophet with these words: [Marginal note: Baruch.] "I will make
with them another everlasting covenant, that I may be their God, and they may be my
people." Concerning which it is also said in Jeremiah: "Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord, and
I will make with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah a new covenant, not according to the covenant which
I made with their fathers, a covenant which they broke: For this will be a
new and eternal covenant and testament, and no longer to be removed
or to grow old." For in saying "new" (says Paul), [Marginal note: Paul.] "he has made the first old: And that which
is antiquated and grows old is near to perishing." Therefore, since that ancient testament [Marginal note: Idem.]
was old, it ought to be changed into a new one, and it has been changed into that beyond which nothing further
is expected. Nor should it trouble anyone that Jeremiah says "covenant" or "pact,"
because "covenant," "pact," and "testament" are taken for the same thing, as we can learn from Paul's
progress with the Hebrews: Thus also was called the ark of the covenant and testament.
And everywhere that promise made in the law, and confirmed by the death of animals, is
called the old testament. Therefore, this testator was competent, and he made his will so
composed of an excellent and sound mind, that no one equal to him has ever existed, as is clear from
his most celebrated doctrine, and in those things which he most prudently carried out when he made the
testament. There were also not just one, but four notaries, greater than all
exception, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, appointed by the supreme
Emperor: who wrote the life, doctrine, deeds, and testament of this
our Father. The witnesses were innumerable from every nation under heaven:
For to this spectacle had gathered Parthians, Medes, Elamites, Mesopotamians,
Cappadocians, Phrygians, Egyptians, Arabs, Cretans, and others who are named in the Acts of the Apostles, [Marginal note: Actu.]
but especially from the three more celebrated languages, Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, in each of which the cause of the testator himself was written
above: All of whom heard what the great man JESUS ordained before his death
in his testament: and saw those signs and wonders which in its corroboration—

--- Page 699 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

were carried out for a reason, both then and afterwards. All are heirs who are born of God and are reborn, unwilling to live according to the flesh and blood. For if [Marginal note: Paul] anyone is not a son, neither is he an heir; but if a son, then also an heir, says Paul: But since we are sons, not indeed of a slave woman and illegitimate, but of a free woman and legitimate, we are consequently heirs. And a little earlier: You are all sons of God through faith in Jesus Christ, whoever of you have been baptized into Christ: And again to the Romans: But if sons, then also [Marginal note: Peter] heirs, heirs indeed of God, but co-heirs with Christ: And Peter: The baptism of Jesus Christ saves you, who is at the right hand of God, swallowing up death, so that we might be made heirs of eternal life: For he swallowed up and destroyed death, which hinders us and removes us from that inheritance.

How the testament was confirmed. Chapter XVII.

[Marginal note: Paul] [Decorative initial V] Consultants of both laws, and all who deal with testamentary matters, agree on this one thing: that a testament is established upon the death of the testator, as Paul testifies with an explicit voice, saying: For where there is a testament, it is necessary that the death of the testator intervene: for a testament is confirmed upon death; otherwise it is not valid while he who made the testament lives: because human will is changeable until death, and mutable in any direction: Nor can anyone impose a law upon himself from which he cannot withdraw: And since the testator can change as long as he lives, and destroy the testament he has already made, therefore it has no force unless the testator comes to death, after which it can no longer be changed. Nor let anyone say that the ancient testament was a true testament, in which he bequeathed a land flowing with milk and honey, and yet was not [Marginal note: The same.] confirmed by death, because Paul has already satisfied this by saying: Indeed, not even the first testament was dedicated without death and blood: For when the command of the law had been read by Moses to all the people, taking the blood of calves and goats with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, he also sprinkled the book itself and all the people, saying: This is the blood of the testament which God has commanded to you. But the figurative testament was confirmed by the death of animals, symbolizing the death of him who was also represented by those animals, whence the Apostle continues: It was therefore necessary that the copies of the heavenly things be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these, namely, by the very death of the true testator: Therefore at the Last Supper he said: This cup is of the new and eternal testament in my blood: Eternal indeed, because beyond that no other will be given, since it is sufficient and unchangeable, promising an inheritance that is not figurative, one that points to and culminates in the true, but the very true one itself, [Marginal note: John] beyond which we expect no other. Nor do I think it should be passed over why both testaments are said to be confirmed not only in death, but in blood, since the death of the testator seemed sufficient, as was presupposed: This was (unless I am mistaken) so that the heirs might become fit and capable of the bequeathed inheritance: for the defiled and polluted cannot possess it, as John says: Nothing defiled in-

--- Page 700 ---
TONVS QVINTVS. 280

will enter there: Nor will those living according to flesh and blood be able to attain that inheritance. Therefore, so that he might cleanse us from defiling blood, the testator willed to pour out his most pure blood, by which we might be cleansed from the defilement of our polluting blood, and again John says: Who washed us from sins in [Marginal note: Ioan.] his blood. Nor was there, according to divine justice, another way by which he might establish sons and they might be capable of so great an inheritance. But it troubles some when it is said that spiritual man is cleansed by blood, which is corporeal; and that by it even angelic minds are cleansed, Paul saying: Making peace through the blood of his [Marginal note: Paulus] cross, whether things on earth or things in heaven. To whom we reply, saying, that since life is (as scripture teaches) in blood, therefore, Christ's life existing in blood, angelic spirits and souls are purged; which blood, nevertheless, ought to be shed, as the occasion of all sin: For blood, and that earthly and sanguineous matter, is the fuel of all sins, as Dionysius defines in *On the Divine Names*: For sin is from self-complacency even to the contempt of God, as [Marginal note: Augusti.] Augustine most excellently judged: But the complacency which separates us from God is from the part of matter, that is, sensible appetite, to which man wishes to please himself, whence he is bound by the law of the members: for which Paul sighing says: I see another law in my members warring [Marginal note: Paulus] against the law of my mind, and leading me captive to the law of sin, so that I do not do the good that I wish, but the evil that I do not wish: So also in angels, the weight that diverts them from God is matter, whatever that may be, according to which, wishing to please themselves, they departed from that most pure act, which is God. And in those having an organized body and blood, concupiscence especially resides in the blood, which cannot have an inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God, until our defiled blood has been purged by the most pure blood of Christ, according to the law by which it is decreed in the book of Wisdom: By those things through which one has sinned, by those things also will he be [Marginal note: Sapien.] punished. Therefore our blood is purged in the blood of Christ, since we have all been made one body, and he himself the head of all. Whence just as medicine, which is taken from the head through the mouth, purges the whole body, so also medicine taken from Christ the head healed all the members: For he drew to himself all our iniquities to be purged by his blood, so that that oracle of Isaiah might be fulfilled, where it is said, by his [Marginal note: Isaias] bruise we are healed.

How Christ was made not only father, but head of all. Chapter XVIII.

[Ornamental initial E] Therefore Christ, anointed with every paternal office, generating, feeding, instructing, enriching, endowing, and bequeathing, not yet content, willed to unite all of us together into the same body, than which union no greater is given: of which he himself, having become the head, would rule all the members and flow into them: Which mystery Paul explained so clearly to the Colossians [Marginal note: Paulus] that it needs no explanation, while he says: He is the head of the body of the Church, and we are its members:

--- Page 701 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

And lest the heavenly powers should be thought excluded, again he says: "He is the head of all principality and power." And again with the Ephesians: "And He gave Him as head over all the Church, which is His body, and the fullness of Him who fills all in all." And how we are all members of this body, we have it sufficiently explained [Marginal note: Paul] by the same Paul, where, speaking with the Romans and Corinthians, he says: "For just as the body is one and has many members, and all the members of the body, though many, are one body, so also is Christ. For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Gentiles, whether slaves or free, and all were made to drink of one Spirit." These members are first divided by a general partition known to all and explained by many. Leaving these to be read in their own books, we will come to some particulars not touched upon by others. In the body we have twelve principal joints: three in the right (arm), namely at the shoulder, elbow, and hand; and as many in the left: which are six. Also three in each foot, one at the hip or thigh, another at the knee, a third at the ankle joint, where the ankle bone is. Which, doubled, are six, and together with those six of the arms, they make twelve, as many as there are principal joints in the celestial body. For Aries is joined with Taurus, this with Gemini, and so on up to

--- Page 702 ---
**TONUS QUINTUS. 281**

each [sign] divided into six parts, so that there are in total 72 parts, over which preside seventy-two princes; thus also the whole family of this mystical body, and all the elect compared to stars by Paul, are contained under the twelve Apostles, and the disciples joined to them. [Marginal note: Paul] And although some divide the signs by tens, attributing three decans to each sign, yet more learned is this division by six quinaries, each of which favors one characteristic nature with such efficacy, that some in our times have made the experiment before many skilled astronomers of discerning from mere physiognomy, of what characteristic nature each person was. But let us return to that which we began: there is one body from all members, whose head is Christ, and the neck uniting the torso with the head is the Blessed Virgin, as Jerome rightly believes. [Marginal note: Jerome] The joint of this neck with the head and torso is beyond those 72; for the neck is beyond, and above the whole torso, and above the neck itself is the head. Thus the Blessed Virgin is above all angels and saints; but Christ is above the Blessed Virgin. If we wish to compare these to the heavens, the Blessed Virgin will be like the ninth sphere above the eighth, and the starry heaven; into which stars she flows, just as the Blessed Virgin pours out upon all of us from the fullness of grace, which she immediately found with God. But Christ, rejoicing in both natures, divine namely and corporeal, is compared to the Empyrean heaven, which is semi-divine and semi-corporeal, experiencing the nature of the ten.

**How Christ, as the true head, flows into all members. Chapter XIX.**

[Decorative initial C] We have already proven that Christ is the head of the whole mystical body; it remains for us to see how into all joints and limbs flows the nourishment of life, governance, movement, and whatever pertains to the sustenance and fostering of that body. And although life and movement (as some wise men believe) are principally in the heart, nevertheless, according to the opinion of Galen, Hali Abbas, and others who wrote about the nature and condition of the human body, [Marginal note: Galen, Hali.] all motive, sensitive, and rational power is in the head: For the motive power descends from the head itself through the nerves, which have their origin in the posterior part of the brain, and are diffused through various members. Nor would movement be regulated and rational, unless it proceeded from the place where reason resides, or a semblance of reason; I say semblance, because this exists in beasts instead of reason. The sensitive power is evident in the eyes, ears, mouth, and nostrils, all situated in the head. And although touch is principally in the hands, it is nevertheless not absent from the head, and from the whole body: And for there to be a rational judgment concerning what has been handled, it is necessary that the whole be referred to the head, where the judgment of reason resides. Also in the head are all the interior senses: the common sense, the fantastic faculty, the imaginative, the cogitative, and the leader of all, the intellect and reason: whence the members are said to be ruled by the head, as by a leader, and to be filled with power, just as streams and channels are filled from a source: All these things, according to a spiritual influx, must undoubtedly proceed from our head, Christ: For in Him are, and from Him are filled, all the senses of the inner man, since we can neither taste, nor see, nor smell, nor hear what belongs to God, unless through

**NN**

--- Page 703 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

[Marginal note: Paul] ...unless through the virtue of this head, Christ, as Paul says: By the grace of God I am what I am:
Which grace flows into us through Jesus Christ. Hence he says to the Philippians: Gra-
ce to you, and peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ: From both he re-
cognizes, the eternal Father, and Christ, because it flows from both. But neither reason,
nor intellect, nor light for knowing divine things exists in us, unless it is sub-
ministered by our head, who is the true light illuminating all. Nor can we be moved to any work
unless He provides it, who says: Without me you can do nothing.
For just as with the head cut off, nothing that remains in the trunk can do anything,
so with Christ departing from man, life departs, and consequently all ope-
ration, and movement that pertains to spiritual life itself. Whatever favor therefore
we wish to have for the inner man, it is necessary to demand it from Him, from whose
[Marginal note: John] fullness (as John says) we have all received. But because these things are widely taught by
the gospels, and we are sufficiently taught by the apostles, having dismissed these, let us come to other things.

What care Christ our parent has for us, his children, whom he be-
got in the ministration of temporal things. Chapter XX.

[Large decorative initial V]
THAT he might make us wholly divine, he wished to remove all solicitude for tem-
poral things from us, taking on the burden and responsibility of sub-
ministering whatever things are necessary, bringing the Father as guarantor
of this generosity, as in the gospel, which is titled according
[Marginal note: Matt.] to Matthew, he says: Do not be anxious, saying, 'What shall we eat?' or
'What shall we drink?' or 'With what shall we be clothed?' All these things the Gentiles seek: For your Father
in heaven knows what you need: Seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteous-
ness, and all these things will be added to you. Here he proves by three reasons that all anxiety must be removed.
The first reason is, because this belongs to the Gentiles, namely, those
who do not admit God's providence, but ascribe all events to chance, or to their own ingenuity, and prudence.
The second: because the best Father, caring for all things,
is solicitous for us, and knows our need, whence if he provides for the birds,
and other living creatures, it is right that he should provide more happily for us. The last rea-
son is, because the order and rectitude of justice requires that we seek first the kingdom
of God, and his righteousness, so that we may find all these things succeeding it, prepared: Which
[Marginal note: Plato] Plato also teaches from the prophetic symposium in the first book of 'Laws,' saying: If anyone takes on greater things,
he will also possess lesser things: but if he lacks the former, he is deprived of both.
Greater and divine goods are justice, piety, and other virtues,
which lead to God: Human goods, however, are strength, beauty, health, rich-
[Marginal note: Cicero] es, and also civic virtues. Following him, Cicero says in his 'On Duties': Those who
prefer advantages to virtues, subvert the order and foundation of nature.
[Marginal note: Macro.] These are supported by what Macrobius adduces in 'On Scipio's Dream'. Plato, ob-
serving the nature of all things and actions, noted in all his discourse concerning
the proposed institution of the Republic, that the love of justice must be instilled, without which not only
a republic, but not even a small gathering of men, nor indeed a small house, will stand. And

--- Page 704 ---
VOLUME SIX.                                                              282

Pythagoras, having drunk from the same source before Plato, said in symbols words quite close to the sacred gospel: "Do not sit (he says) upon a modius, or upon a choenix" (as is the truth of the matter), that is, upon daily food, as Hieronymus, Laertius, and Suida rightly interpret. [Marginal note: Hieron. Laër.] Which is the same as if he were to say: "Do not think about tomorrow," [Marginal note: Suidas] although Plutarch and others understand that passage differently. [Marginal note: Plutarc.] Therefore, from all the aforesaid, it is concluded that all care for food and clothing must be placed in the supreme head of the household, as Peter teaches, saying: "Cast all your anxiety upon God, because He cares for you." [Marginal note: Petrus.] We confirm this with many experiences: For the earth, at God's command, produces many kinds of food, not only for the necessity of dwelling in it, but also for the most generous abundance. Likewise concerning wood for buildings and for kindling fire, and concerning wool, linen, and silk for an abundance of clothing, He provides the most plentiful supply: nor is it otherwise concerning metals for the use of money and other things. And what is wonderful, gold and silver are continuously dug up for minting money, yet there is no greater abundance of coins at present than there was many centuries ago. All these things must be arranged by one provider: and they are arranged with such order that a better one cannot be conceived. But if anyone should think otherwise, I will say to him that saying of Chrysippus: "Show what is better:" [Marginal note: Chrysipp.] Which, since you will never be able to show, if you attempt it, you will either make it worse, or you will desire what cannot be done. We leave these matters to be discussed more seriously in their proper place.

Christ is the end and complement of all works, giving to all so that they may work.
                                                              Tone Six.

CHRIST is the author and end of faith.                                 Chapter One.
Christ, not only the cause of faith, but of all things, fills all things with His divinity.
                                                              Chapter II.
Christ is not a part, nor the whole, yet He is the whole and a part.
                                                              Chapter III.
From the sacred scriptures we have that Christ is all things.          Chapter IIII.
That we still have from sacred scripture that Christ Himself claimed for Himself the names of many artificers.
                                                              Chapter V.
That also without usurpation Christ Jesus claimed for Himself all divine names.
                                                              Chapter VI.
How in the name of Jesus all names, both created and divine, are included.
                                                              Chapter VII.
Why only the name of Jesus is invoked today by true worshippers of God.
                                                              Chapter VIII.
How from sacred scripture we have Christ prefigured as the fount of all merit, grace, and glory.
                                                              Chapter IX.
The same is proven by prophecies.                                     Chapter X.
How clearly Isaiah reserved all these things in a single oracle.       Chapter XI.
From all the aforesaid, it is concluded that Jesus was the complement not only of the works of God, but also of our operations and merits, and consequently giving us the means to work.
                                                              Chapter XII.
                                                              NN ij

--- Page 705 ---
OF THE SECOND CANTICLE
CHRIST IS THE AUTHOR AND END OF FAITH. Chapter One.

[Marginal note: Paul]
SO MANY things seem to be believed which are not
Christ Jesus, that I would in no way dare to call Him
the author and end of faith, unless Paul, in whose breast
He resounds, taught me this: Who, when disputing with the Hebrews,
exhorts them all, saying: "Let us run the race set before
us, looking to Jesus, the author of faith and its per-
fecter." But I believe this was said for this reason,
because while we could adduce some reasons for other articles,
for those, however, which treat of Christ Jesus, we can adduce absolutely none,
except fitting reasons, and these only as much as we are taught by divine oracles:
For we can investigate by natural dis-
[Marginal note: Aristotle.]
course that God exists, and that He was the maker of all things, although Aristotle,
as a natural philosopher and proceeding through sensible things, does not admit this: Yet, awakened
by these very sensible things, he does not disagree with other wise men who confess God to be the maker
of the whole world. But that He made all these things through the incarnate Word, who is Christ Jesus,
we have this only from the sacred scriptures, together with the other articles
pertaining to Him, so much so that some of the more recent theologians have asserted
that Christ is the subject around which all our theology revolves, since all
articles seem to refer to Christ Himself: For in the first it is said: "I believe in God
the Father": And indeed, a father cannot exist without a son, who is Christ Jesus.
And the second is: "And in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord." The
third: "Who was conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary." The fourth: "He suf-
fered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died, and was buried." The fifth: "He descended into
hell." The sixth: "On the third day He rose again from the dead." The seventh: "And He ascended into heaven,
sits at the right hand of the Father." The eighth: "From there He will come to judge the living and the dead."
The ninth: "I believe in the Holy Spirit." And because He proceeds from the Father and the Son, He cannot be
had or understood without the Son. The tenth: "The holy catholic Church, the communion
of saints, the forgiveness of sins." All these things, since they pertain to the mystical body, of which
Christ is the head, cannot at all be done or had without Christ Himself,
especially since both the unifying grace, and the life by which all members communicate, and the
spirit from which they obtain remission, are from the same Christ Jesus. The elev-
enth: "The resurrection of the flesh": Which cannot be, unless Christ,
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
who is the firstfruits of those who sleep, has risen. The twelfth: "Life everlasting," which is given
by Christ, who says: "I give them eternal life." Behold then, how all things to be believed
either are about Christ, or emanate from Him, or are referred to Him: But all things to be
done, and all commandments, although they may seem external and separate from Him,
[Marginal note: The Same.]
nevertheless cannot be carried out without Him, who says: "Without me you can do nothing."
Christ therefore is the author and perfecter of faith, and of all things which pertain to it.

--- Page 706 ---
TOMVS SEXTVS. 283

pertain both to things to be believed and to things to be done. But if we wish to admit the theology of the Hebrews, their ten elements also exist, and many things described in the law, which were revealed through the word of the Lord, and God's wisdom finally diffused in man, who is Christ JESUS, according to that saying of Baruch: [Marginal note: Baruch.] He found every way of discipline, and delivered it to Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved: After these things he was seen on earth, and conversed with men, the same Lord established in the new testament, who had also delivered in the old: For all truth was finally made and explained through JESUS Christ. Therefore, He Himself is the author and perfecter of faith, and of all things which we ought to believe and do: and He is the author and giver of faith, which is a habit and a virtue: Hence Paul says: [Marginal note: Paulus] How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? And he infers: Therefore faith comes by hearing: and hearing by the word of Christ. Behold then how He is the author of faith. But He is the perfecter, because our faith ought to be directed to Him, who will also bestow the reward of faith: both of which He Himself explains, when He says: He who believes in me, even if he dies, shall live: and everyone who believes in me shall not die eternally: [Marginal note: CHRIST.] And again: He who believes in me, has eternal life: And again: The Son of Man must be lifted up, that whoever believes in Him may not perish, but have eternal life: And John: [Marginal note: Ioan.] He who believes in the Son of God, has eternal life. Nor indeed were the ancient fathers saved without this faith, as it is said of Abraham: Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him for righteousness: But what did he believe, and in whom did he believe? He believed indeed (says Paul) [Marginal note: Paul.] in Him who justifies the ungodly. Nor was it written for his sake only, that it was reckoned to him for righteousness, but also for us, to whom it shall be reckoned, who believe in Him who raised JESUS Christ from the dead, who was delivered for our offenses, and rose again for our justification. Behold how Paul directs the faith of Abraham, and of all believers, to Christ JESUS, as the true author and perfecter of faith: To this is added that which follows: Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord JESUS Christ, through whom we have access by faith into this grace in which we stand, who formerly lay through sin. Therefore, through Abraham, the father of faith, who believed in Him who justifies the ungodly, all believers are understood, who were also said to be gathered into his bosom. But let us see what he believed. It had been said to him: In your seed, which is Christ, all the nations of the earth shall be blessed, namely, those who believe in His name, who is the author and perfecter of faith.

Christ, not only the cause of faith, but of all things, fills all things with His divinity. Chapter II.

[Decorative initial letter 'E' containing figures of people] ALTHOUGH we have explained that all things were made in the Word of God and through Him, whence He is deservedly called the cause of all things, nevertheless, He fills all these same things no less than He of whom it is said: The Spirit of the Lord has filled the whole world. He also fills together with the Father, who [Marginal note: wisdom.]

NN iij

--- Page 707 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

Jeremiah. Or the whole Trinity says simultaneously through Jeremiah: "Heaven and earth I fill." But in different ways according to the different things appropriated to them. Above we spoke of the mind of Origen, that from the Father we have our being; from the Son, that we understand; but the rest, that they are ordered; but from the Holy Spirit, that we are holy; but from the spirit of life, that all things live. But if we wish to follow the ancient theologians, who say that the one precedes being itself, we will attribute that one to the first, who is the Father, the first origin of all things: but being to the Son, as is expressly held in their theology, namely that being belongs to supreme wisdom, which is the Son: that being, of course, is communicable, just as wisdom to be communicated to us is attributed to the Son, which, as it exists in the Father, is to be given only to the Son himself: And this is what he said: "No one knows the Father except the Son, and he to whom the Son wills to reveal him." Behold how we expressly have wisdom first existing in the Father, then in the Son.

[Marginal notes]:
Jeremiah.
Origen.
Theologians.
Christ.

--- Page 708 ---
VOLUME SIX. 284

I may become, which is his body, and is the fullness of him who fills all in all.
And again with the Colossians: Christ is all in all, because he completes all things with a fullness suitable to each. But let us see how this Christ is something separate from all things, and all in all.

Christ is neither part, nor whole, and yet is whole, and part. Chapter III.

<span style="font-size: 200%; line-height: 0.5em; vertical-align: -0.2em;">W</span>hen therefore Christ is all in all, it could rightly be asked whether he is as a part of anything, or a whole in all parts, or a certain divine power completing all things. Here, the revered Dionysius states the opinion of Hie- [Marginal note: Dionysius, Hierotheus] rotheus: JESUS is neither part, nor whole: And yet he is whole, and part, receiving and pre-possessing the part of all things, and the whole in himself: declaring which, he says, the divinity of JESUS is indeed perfect in imperfect things, just as a perfect gem in a rotten wooden box, which ought to be in gold: Yet it does not shine equally well, nor operate so perfectly, as if it were set in metal, or in a material proportionate to itself: But in perfect things, it is not with the perfect perfection by which those things are perfect, but super-perfect and pre-perfect, exceeding, that is, every lower perfection: And he is the form-maker, and introduces form into those things which lack it, as the true giver of forms, and the prince of form, not existing as a determined form, that is, but above all forms, just as the Sun favors the production of all herbs and animals, not itself being an animal or a plant, but having a superexcellent power for producing all those things: And he is a substance supervening all substances, illuminating all of them without defilement of himself: because he is separated from every substance, just as solar rays are in no way defiled when pervading mud, dirt, and whatever is vile, because they are separated from them: And he is ordering all principles, determining all orders, yet placed above every order, and every principle, and above every principality, just as an Emperor ought to order all his generals, existing above every dukedom, and just as the Pope orders all bishops, himself being a bishop, yet above every episcopate: And this is what the Apostle says with the Colossians: He is before all, and all things consist in him, since he is the head of the body of the Church: And he is the measure of all existing things, existing as duration above all duration, because he rejoices in eternity, which is the total possession at once: And he is the meter of all perfection: Therefore, the more one approaches him, the more perfect one is: And he is the full measure in those who have less, not failing on his part, so that he may fill all things with his fullness: But in those who are full, his fullness is not emptied, but is above all fullness: and it so exceeds that it is ineffable and inexplicable to us, and above all mind: And he is life vivifying all things, yet not living an inferior life, but he himself exists as the supreme life, which is above all lives: and he has all natural things supernaturally: Whence, although by his benevolence he came even to our nature, and truly became human substance, and man, and the highest man, yet he was called God:
NN iiij

--- Page 709 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

And although he received the properties of our nature, nevertheless he always existed as something supernatural and supersubstantial, suffering absolutely no injury to his dignity from that ineffable emptying, which he communicated to us invariably and without confusion: Hence he was a newness surpassing all newness, existing in our natural things supernaturally, and in our substances supersubstantially, having and containing all our things above us, and perfecting all things, as we said above: And he is (as the Apostle says) the bond, foundation, and support of every creature, binding all things, connecting all things, embracing all things, vivifying all things, and filling all things.
[Marginal note: Paul.]

From the sacred scriptures we have that Christ is all things. Chapter IIII.

**G**enerally, we have demonstrated that Christ is a certain whole in all parts, but what testimonies the sacred scriptures provide concerning this in particular, we will briefly review: And beginning from the lowest of all created things, we will say that God is the earth, that true earth flowing with the milk of higher wisdom, and the honey of divinity, or the taste of divine things, concerning which the prophet sang: "For the Lord will give goodness, and our land will yield its fruit." He is also water, as we explained more fully above. He is also air and breath, by which, breathing upon his disciples, he said: "Receive the Holy Spirit": for he would not give it unless he possessed it. He is fire, which he came to send upon the earth, that it might burn. He is a grain of wheat and a sprout of the earth, saying of himself: "Unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it bears no fruit; but if it dies," from which grain that living bread descending from heaven for our salvation was made. He is the tree (as we said) of the knowledge of good and evil, and the tree of life, providing wood for the flooring and planking of the entire true edifice to be built by us. He is also a stone and a rock, as Paul says: "Now that rock was Christ": Upon which the Church is founded, and also, placed in the corner, it joined together the whole edifice, and it is the rock that provided us water for washing and drinking. He is gold, which, promising to sell, he says: "I advise you to buy from me gold refined by fire." He is silver, according to that prophetic saying: "The words, or utterances of the Lord, are pure words, silver tried in the fire, purified seven times": And what is the true word of the Lord, if not Christ, who is the Word made flesh? Among animals, he is the lion, king of beasts, concerning whom it is said in the Apocalypse: "The Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has conquered." He is a calf, or the chief of the herd, as doctors commonly explain that which is found in the Gospel according to Luke: "And he killed the fatted calf." He is the lamb, preeminent among tame animals, therefore the Baptist, knowing these mysteries, pointing to him, said: "Behold the Lamb of God." He is also the eagle, queen of birds, whose ascent into heaven, gazing at the sun with unblinking eyes, Solomon numbers among the four most difficult things. And rightly was he an eagle, who carries his young on his back, with wings spread against archers, receiving the wound himself to preserve his children: Therefore concerning Christ, Isaiah says: "He was wounded for-
[Marginal note: Dauid]
[Marginal note: CHRISTVS.]
[Marginal note: Idem.]
[Marginal note: Paulus Apocal.]
[Marginal note: Dauid]
[Marginal note: Lucas]
[Marginal note: Baptista.]
[Marginal note: Isaias]

--- Page 710 ---
**TONVS SEXTVS.** **285**

our transgressions: And Moses in his song: As an eagle stirring up its nestlings to fly, [Marginal note: Moses.]
hovering over them: spread out its wings, and took them up, and
carried them on its shoulders. He is also the Sun and Moon, chief among the planets, as the divine
Psalmist sings: His throne is like the sun before me, and like the moon, [Marginal note: Dauid]
perfected forever, and a faithful witness in heaven: according to that of John in the Apocalypse: [Marginal note: Ioan.]
from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness. He is called by Malachi the Sun of righteousness who will
rise for those who fear the name of the Lord: according to what the Church, by frequent custom, says to the
Virgin: "For from you has risen the Sun of righteousness, Christ our God." Also,
in that he is heavenly and contains the entire globe of the heavens, he is called the Orient,
namely, the principal part of heaven, hinting at the East of the archetype from which he came, according to that of Za- [Marginal note: Zacha.]
chariah: "Behold, a man whose name is the Orient (or Branch), under whom the temple of the Lord will be built," which,
namely, is us. We could also show how he could deservedly claim for himself the names of all the planets,
since he possessed a certain preeminence in the influence and effects of all of them.
For he was an interpreter of divine things better than Mercury, who is called Hermes and the interpreter of divine matters: And how excellent an inter-
preter Christ was, he himself explains in a few words, saying: "All things whatsoever [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
I have heard from my Father, I have made known to you:" And as a superior and good Venus, he
showed us his effect, namely love and affection, above all others,
giving his soul and life for his beloved ones. But also, at his departure, he left love as a commandment and testa-
ment, saying: "This I command you, that you love one another." He is also [Marginal note: Idem.]
the true Mars, the fiercest punisher of evildoers, because the Father has given all judgment to him:
Therefore, Peter says in the Acts of the Apostles: "He has been appointed judge of the living [Marginal note: Petrus]
and the dead." He is Jupiter, just, full of kindness and piety, according to that
which John says: "Grace and truth came through Jesus Christ." [Marginal note: Ioan.]
Finally, he is the true Saturn, and the true Sabbath emanating from him, in which we ought to
rest as he had promised, saying: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
from me, and you will find rest for your souls:" Which rest will be in me, who
will refresh all of you who labor and are burdened. Nor should anyone be disturbed
if we say that Christ claimed for himself the names of the planets, since he also wished to be called by the names
of animals, which are inferior to the planets. He is also called a mountain ele-
vated above the tops of the mountains: "A mountain, indeed, firm, a rich mountain, a mountain in
which it pleased God to dwell:" For Adonai will dwell there forever, or perpetually, because divinity will never be separated from him.
He was also called an angel in Malachi, where, after speaking of John, the angel preceding the face of the Messiah, [Marginal note: Mala.]
it is then added concerning Christ himself: "And suddenly the Lord whom you seek will come to his holy temple,
and the angel of the covenant whom you desire." For he
was truly the angel of the covenant and of peace, although made better than the angels, and the Lord
of angels. For he is the Word, through whom all things were made: Whence by Dionysius [Marginal note: Diony.]
he is called "ens," that is, "the being that makes all things to be," the supereminent cause, the founding existence,
and the principle of all things. Him Plato [calls] "on" (being), and Hierotheus in the book of elements his- [Marginal note: Plato. Hieroth.]

NN v

--- Page 711 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

the supersubstantial being calls forth all producing essences, and sustaining all things: [Marginal note: Dionysius] All being (says Dionysius) equally embracing in itself, and super-apprehending: Therefore he is called the king of ages, and in whom, and around whom all being, and that which is, subsists and revolves. [Marginal note: Plato] Which Plato touches upon in his letter to Dionysius, explaining it very little: All these things, applied to Christ according to a better sense, are said so that he might be element, metal, animal, heaven, and such a supracelestial and supramundane being, most excellently containing the virtues of all things, whence he flows into all. Through these multi-faceted names, therefore, they intimate that he is a certain whole, and whatsoever, to whom those names belong, since both to them and to him true names have been imposed not by chance, but by design, [Marginal note: Genesis] according to the property of what was named by the first man, as we read in Genesis: Which is perceived by those who well know the property of the first language, which is now called Hebrew, in which those most fitting names were imposed: The Greeks, like apes, [Marginal note: Plato] imitated these things somewhat, as Plato attempts to demonstrate in Cratylus. Here therefore Christ, because he is of all kinds, and contains all things, has acquired names of all kinds not only in natural, infernal, and celestial things, but also in artificial and divine things.

**That we still have from sacred scripture that Christ himself claimed for himself the names of many artificial things. Chapter V.**

[Large decorative initial Q containing a figure] What artificial names he also acquired, we can learn from the same scripture: For he is the great house of God, in which all forms and images of things were placed, before they appeared in their proper subjects: Whence the seal of himself, and of supreme wisdom in Hebrew theology, is assigned to ב (Beth), which, when explained, signifies 'house': And this house is typically said to be built without iron, axe, hammer, and every kind of iron tool, because it is entirely filled with clemency, piety, beneficence, without any iron hardness: In which house sacrifices, oblations, and prayers are offered to the Father: which is intimated in that which he said: "Whatever you ask the Father in my name, he will give you:" For to ask in his name is to work in his power, and within his scope. He is also called a tabernacle better than that made by hand, arranged by Moses, as God had commanded: For Christ is a tabernacle not made by hand, that is, not of this creation: Which is not only heaven, as we said elsewhere, but Christ himself is no less, indeed, a better tabernacle of God than we are, concerning whom the Apostle says: "You are the temple of God." And he is the door, as [Marginal note: Paul CHRIST] he himself says: "I am the door; if anyone enters through me, he will be saved." And he is the true ark of the covenant, and of the pact between God and us, and the true mediator existing: whence he is also called the bow of the covenant. He is also not only grain, but bread kneaded and made by the art of the supreme artisan. He is also wine pressed by him who treads in the winepress of the cross. Moreover, he is called a garment, by which the sins of all are covered, [Marginal note: Paul] according to that of the Apostle to the Romans: "Put on our Lord Jesus Christ." He is also the book of life, in which all who are to be saved are written, according to that which sings

--- Page 712 ---
**TONE SIX. 286**

prophet: "And in your book all will be written." He is also called an altar, and a host [Marginal note: David] which is offered upon that altar. And he is (by his own testimony) a polished and straight way, through which we can proceed to God. He is a ladder between God and us, by which we ascend to God himself: Which was once shown to Jacob, fixed in earthly flesh, and touching heaven with the summit of divinity, not indeed this [heaven] which we all see, or that third [heaven] which Paul saw in his rapture, but that su- [Marginal note: Paul] preme [heaven], concerning which, as well as concerning the earth upon which the ladder stood, the prophet says: "The heaven of heavens belongs to the Lord, but the earth he gave to the sons of men." To which heaven, because one does not ascend except through Christ, he is therefore deservedly called the ladder by which one ascends to God. Moreover, he is everything that was contained in the ark of the covenant, namely that most sweet manna of divinity, which no one knows except he who receives it. Also in him are the tablets of the law, because just as there, as in a book, all creatures are written, so too is the whole law and all wisdom; according to that [saying] of Paul: "In him are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge." And he is Aaron's blossoming rod, that is, priestly virtue flourishing and germinating, when all priesthood refers to Christ and has efficacy from him, who by an oath was constituted a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek, with a truly royal and divine priesthood. Finally, he is the true candelabrum of divine light, from which Isaiah, full of joy, [Marginal note: Isaiah] urged the family of God to grasp this, crying: "Arise, shine, Jerusalem, for your light has come, and the glory of the Lord has risen upon you," that is, Christ, who is the glory of the Father: to whom the prophet, speaking, adds: "And the nations shall walk in your light, and kings in the splendor of your rising."

**That Christ Jesus also claimed for himself all divine names without usurpation. Chapter VI.**

[Decorative initial A] But coming to supermundane things, although God is unique and especially one, he is nevertheless called by many names, not indeed so that multiple essences or deities of his might be expressed by them, but properties, which, even if they emanate from the same fount of divinity, are nevertheless rooted there and are always one, but are called many with respect to us, into whom many benefits and diverse gifts distill through diverse channels. Therefore, God himself, most unified, is assigned diverse names, concerning ten of which Jerome [Marginal note: Jerome] compiled a short treatise to Marcella. But Dionysius, [Marginal note: Dionysius] proceeding further, collects forty-five names of God and of our Christ. But the Hebrew [Marginal note: Hebrew Doctors] doctors deduce seventy-two names from a certain text found in the fourteenth chapter of Exodus, [Marginal note: Exodus] from the name (as they say) of seventy-two letters. But others, proceeding still further, hint at so many divine names that both their number and what they signify are entirely unknown to us, but each speaks according to his own understanding, because not all secrets are revealed to all: Nor would we dare to say anything about them, except insofar as they are revealed to us by God

--- Page 713 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...revealed by benevolence, as Dionysius teaches us, and with him other wise men, not only Catholics and Hebrews, but also Plato, who in Cratylus says: "Divine names were received from barbarians, that is, Hebrews, who received them from God, without whom we can in no way grasp true words, or what names God is called by." Therefore, as far as divine light has shone forth for us, we will touch upon some (names) which all agree with Christ, yet with this law, which Dionysius teaches, that we in no way presume to explain that supreme and ineffable substance, which neither our senses, nor imagination, nor speech, nor touch, nor knowledge reaches: because it is an uninvocable, super-nominable, and supersubstantial deity, contained in the most remote retreat of its divinity, and solitary withdrawal, concealing itself in the abyss of its own darkness: Also, in the supersubstantial thearchy, excellently separated from every state, movement, deliberation, name, word, intellect, placement, position, and end, utterly shunning our knowledge and explanation: which the [Marginal note: Hebrews] Hebrews call the infinite cause of causes, and substance above all substance: Nor do they presume to speak anything else about it, because it is infinite, and in no way perceptible by [Marginal note: Isaiah] our intellect: whom (if I am not mistaken) Isaiah wished not to explain, but barely to hint at with a certain general term, while he introduces him speaking these words: אני יהוה הוא שמי וכבודי לאחר לא אתן, that is, "I am the Lord, that very thing which is, is my name, my glory, this indeed I will not give to another, or to a stranger from me." For which our translation has: "This is my name," so that that relative "this" seems to refer to some name; for it indicates no name, but only hints at that which supremely is, and is utterly inexpressible by itself and by us, as we have it better interpreted a little further down, where it says אני הוא, that is, "chi ani hu": "Because I myself am," that is, from myself and through essence, whence it follows: "Before me no God was formed, and after me there will be none," from whom, that is, I could depend and receive being. So also that [Marginal note: David] Davidic passage ואתה הוא ושנותיך לא יתמו (ve'ata hu u'shnoteikha lo yitamu) is appropriately translated: "But you are the same, and your years will not fail." Therefore, that הוא (hu) there is not a relative (pronoun), but hints at that which is, namely from itself, and the first being, which is by essence. Concerning this name and the named, the more secret Theologians permit nothing further to be said at all, except that it is from itself, and infinite. But when God himself begins to open the fount of his goodness, and to diffuse it inwards (as they say) and outwards, then he acquires very many other names: Wishing to speak of these, we declare that we do so only by that law, by which [Marginal note: Dionysius] Dionysius deals with Timothy: that the secrets may not be poured into the ears of the unworthy, but may be kept among the wise with due reverence. Therefore, the first name of God the producer is אהיה אשר אהיה (ehieh asser ehieh), so fertile with mysteries, that all things are produced by it: For it is a name attributed to the superior crown, and to the fount, goodness, and origin of all things, whom Christ taught us to call Father. Who so flees our comprehension that no one knows him, except the Son, and he to whom the Son wishes to reveal him. From whom our

--- Page 714 ---
**TONUS SEXTUS. 287**

The translation, briefly explaining itself, has it interpreted as, "I am who I am": which would sound better to the truth of the letter as: "I may be who I may be," or "I will be who I will be," since that word is repeated twice in the Hebrew in the future tense: Nevertheless, it includes much longer mysteries than can be interpreted literally: But passing only superficially, we will say how from that אהיה is formed that great four-letter name of God, or tetragrammaton יהוה, attributed to the Son: so that just as the Son proceeds from the Father, so also His name is produced from the Father's name: For when אהיה is given אשר, which from one lesser number and two greater ones gives me six, which number is signified among the Hebrews by ו, and this [Vav] is placed in the position of ה, and if [a Yod] is prefixed, the tetragrammaton יהוה is constituted: Which is the name of the Son, bestowing life upon lower beings: Which is hinted at by that character ו, namely, life received from the Father, from whom all things have been delivered to Him: And thus, He who was unique in the Father, marked in א, which is the first letter signifying one, becomes ו, namely life, and the senary communicating being and life to all things, denoted in that senary in the works of six days: For all things were made through the Word, and without Him nothing was made. And lest it be believed that the Son is separated from the Father, that quadriliteral name of the Son is included in the seal of the house, measure, or Paternal dwelling, which is א, formed from ו and two י, which letters, when computed numerically, yield 26, the same amount that the quadriliteral name, which is the Son's, gives: By these numbers we do not understand vocal, or natural, or rational numbers, but divine ones, and properties of divinity, which are so reciprocally in communion in the Father and the Son, that the Son Himself says: [Marginal note: CHRISTUS.] "I am in the Father, and the Father is in me." And from the aforesaid name אהיה, one letter, namely ה, being changed into ל, and which letters in the middle numbers yield seven, that is, seven denarii, אלהים is constituted, which is the name of the Holy Spirit, to whom the septenary is always attributed: In which the ternary is connected with the quaternary, to denote that the virtue of the Holy Spirit unites corporeal quaternaries with the divine ternary. Also, to denote the connection that the Holy Spirit has with the Son, He receives two letters which are found both in the name of the Father and of the Son, namely, י and ה: Hence the Son says of the Spirit Himself: "He will take what is mine." And since the Son has received from the Father, therefore He proceeds from the Father and the Son, and receives. And since all those names [Marginal note: Idem.] are included in the quadriliteral, which is the name of the Son, therefore He claims for Himself, without usurpation, all the aforesaid names, and all others that pertain to divinity and the archetype: Thus, by the perfect production of persons, He opens the fountain-like splendor of His goodness into creatures to be produced by the Father in the Son, and through the Son, and through the Holy Spirit, as through an immediate artisan: therefore His name, operating and disposing, is always introduced by Moses saying: [Marginal note: Moses.] "And Elohim said, and Elohim made." And to denote that the Son also intervened in this production, in summing up all that was made, he introduces the name of both the Son and the Holy Spirit, saying: "These are the generations of the heavens and the earth when they were created, in the day that Adonai Elohim made the earth and the heavens." In this production, therefore, God the artisan, who

--- Page 715 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

is in Christ Jesus, is given many other names, but seven principal ones: for since
He was led to the work by goodness alone and love, and produced in love, He is given
[Marginal note: Hieron.] the name of clemency, which is אל or אלוה El, or Elohe. That El (as Jerome
teaches and we have in frequent use) signifies God, namely, most clement
[Marginal note: Aquila.] and pious: although sometimes it also signifies strong, as Aquila more often
[Marginal note: Psalm.] interpreted it. Concerning El, we have in Psalm 49 according to us, but 50
according to the Hebrews, אל אלהים יהוה El elohim adonai diber: which we have
interpreted as, God of gods, the Lord has spoken. Concerning Elohe, we have in Exodus,
יהוה אלהי העברים נקרה עלינו Adonai elohe abibrim nicrah halenu, that is,
Adonai, God of the Hebrews, has been invoked upon us: for which we have: He has
called us: And both names, El and Elohe, are of piety and clemency. And because
not only piety,

--- Page 716 ---
**TONE SIX.**

--- Page 717 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

domestically and by a certain general influence with all things, it is called, אדני & מלך Melech & Adonai, that is King & Lord of all, governing all things. And Chri-
[Marginal note: John.] st is called by John in the Apocalypse King of kings, and Lord of lords, and prince of the kings of the earth. There are many other names pertaining to the divinity, which we could adduce, but these will suffice, which are more celebrated in sacred scripture, and from which all other things depend; indeed (as the more secret theologians say) all divine names are derived from the quadriliteral, or tetragrammaton: by knowing which, all other things are known: And by which, when concluded in the name of Jesus, all other things are understood to be concluded in the same.

How in the name of Jesus all names, both created and divine, are included. Chapter VII.

[Decorative initial N in a square frame] If the power of all names were not included in the name of Jesus, the Apostle would not say: He gave him a name which is above every name. For it is a great word, by which he says: He gave him a name which is above every name: It is indeed above every name of all created things, even of Angels, as the Apostle says elsewhere: [Marginal note: Paul.] Having become so much better than the angels, as he has inherited a more excellent name than they. And because the power of all divine names is included in the name of Jesus, we will say with reverence that this name is above all names expressing attributes or particular properties: For just as the Father gave him all things, so also he bestowed upon him a name importing all those things, so that the name itself might be fitting for the one named. Let us also briefly examine with what artifice all things are included in the name ישו (Yeshu). Among those who are skilled in formal arithmetic, a simple number indicates divine things, a denary (ten) celestial things, a centenarius (hundred) grosser and corruptible things, while a millenarius (thousand) again indicates divine things, and God, whom [Marginal note: Cant.] finally all things repeat: Therefore at the end of the Canticles it is said: A thousand to you, Solomon, that is, to you, who are your peace, and two hundred to those who guard its fruits, that is, to us living in corruptible flesh, who seek to guard his commandments, from which we receive the fruits of eternal life: Which doctrine the wise Hebrews follow, while they declare that mystery of terumah, which we call tithing: in which the centenarius (hundred) is of the people: while the denarius (ten), which is the tenth of the centenarius, was given to priests, indeed celestial men: but the tenth of this denarius, which is one, is given to God. Behold then, that the simpler number is given to God, the centenarius to the grosser people, still unrefined and subject to corruption, but the denarius to the priests mediating between both: Now all these things are understood to be concluded in the name of Jesus: for it is composed of three letters, one of which imports a simple number, namely י (Yod): another, which is ו (Vav), a denary (ten), and the other, that is ש (Shin), includes hundreds. Nor is it to be wondered at, if the letter importing a number refers not to unity, but to six, because it was not done without a sacrament: For since the supreme craftsman came into creation through the senary (six), a number indeed perfect from the beginning, it is fitting that it be included in the name of the incarnate Word, through whom all things were made. But with what great mystery he proceeded into creation through the senary, besides those things which have been said elsewhere, these few

--- Page 718 ---
TOMVS SEXTVS. 289

we will briefly touch upon. The Monad, and the supremely fertile one, therefore produces another, from which the binary arises: and between the producer and the produced there is a mutual relation, behold the ternary: now combine three, and they will give the senary (six) by doing this: one and 2. make three: to which if three are added, they make 6. Of these, the first ternary, collected from the producer, the produced, and the mutual relation, or reciprocal love, is in God: the other ternary, however, is in created things, since all things contain a trace of God even in number: for they have matter, and form, from which results the composite, which they call a certain third thing. Nor should one insist concerning angels, because even they have their own matter, and their own composition. There is also another ternary in every creature, namely, beginning, middle, and end. And well among the letters signifying numbers in the name of Jesus is placed י (yod), by which the tree of life is designated, since He himself was both the tree of life, and life, and gives life to all. Behold then how beautifully in this name of Jesus it is indicated that all things were included in the one named, as the Apostle says: "For it pleased [Marginal note: Paul] the Father, namely, that all fullness should dwell in Him, and through Him to reconcile, or to recapitulate all things." But since all created things are contained in Christ as man, even the producing and operating reasons, which are in the archetype, are contained in Christ as God: Concerning all of which to write would be too long, and we would proceed further than the present work requires. How, however, the principal names of God, and those which are more frequently and openly repeated in sacred scripture, are contained in this name ישו (Iesu), we will sketch. This quadriliteral name is most famous, and most frequent, which is written thus יהוה and cannot be pronounced: but when it is read, it is pronounced Adonai. Therefore, two principal letters of this name, namely י (yod) and ו (vav), are contained in the name ישו (Yeshu). The two ה (he) letters, however, by a great mystery are changed into ש (shin): For the more secret theologians say that the supreme creator God produced all spiritual things through a certain force signified in the first ה (he): and corporeal things through the power signified in the second ה (he). And since all things were made through the incarnate Word, who is named Jesus, the virtues, or properties themselves, signified by those two ה (he)s, are included in Him. But because Jesus was given, and sent to us as a redeemer, and a guide to true rest, which is eternal life, indeed He became our very rest, therefore in place of those two ה (he)s, which signify the principles of the beginning in the name ישו (Iesu), ש (shin) is placed, which is the beginning of שבת (sabat), and itself signifies what is interpreted as rest. Behold how many and how great mysteries are imported in the three letters of this name ישו (Iesu): For י (yod) signifies divinity, as is most well-known among the theologians themselves; י (yod) the tree of life, and ש (shin) rest: and it is denoted that our Jesus is God, vivifying all with both lives, and finally beatifying in that eternal rest. That quadriliteral name also exists by another mystery in the name of Jesus, through the way, namely, of numbers, with the name of the mother added, from whom He drew the substance of His body: For the four letters of that name yield in number 26. and the name of the mother, which is מרים (Miriam), gives 290. Which number joined with those 26 constitutes 316, which number also the letters of the name ישו (Iesu) give. In which is denoted the named one himself
oo

--- Page 719 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

proceeded from God the Father and a human mother. By this same path of numbers, we conclude that the terrifying name שדי (Shaddai) is contained in Jesus: whose letters in number give 314. To this number, if the binary (two) is added, which signifies corporality, it constitutes 316, which is the number of the letters of the name ישו (Yeshu), as we recently said. To him [Marginal note: David] also was given the power of that name שדי (Shaddai), which was always terrifying to the enemies of the human race. Hence, in Psalm 90, which was made to terrify those enemies, the prophet says: "He shall dwell in the shadow of Shaddai." For which we have: "He shall abide in the protection of the God of heaven." [Marginal note: CHRIST] Therefore, when Christ recognized that the power of that name was contained in his own, he revealed the mystery to the Apostles, saying: "In my name they shall cast out demons," and the other things that follow.

There is also in the name of Jesus this name אל (El), which signifies God; and אלה (Eloah), which is the same as its plural אלהים (Elohim); although sometimes this name is singular and imports a singular God diffused and multiplied in many created things. Hence, in the creation of the world, when God, by diffusing himself into creatures, began to appear manifold, he is introduced as the creator under this name Elohim, with scripture saying: "And Elohim said, and Elohim made, and Elohim created." Which some, not understanding, wrongly translated by saying: "He created Gods." Others, however, join the singular name with a singular verb, saying that by it is understood the Trinity and a plurality of persons. But truly and properly explaining it, by that name Elohim is understood the craftsman diffusing himself into many things, or judging many through multiple ministers executing judgment. Hence, in scripture, sometimes both angels executing God's judgments and judges [Marginal note: Exod.] judging are called Elohim. As we have in Exodus, when thieves and those causing damage are ordered to be brought to Elohim to be judged by them; where we have translated: "Their case shall come before the Gods."

Therefore, not only the virtues of these names—which are to have mercy, to distribute, and to judge—are fitting in our Jesus, but also the mysteries of the letters. If we wished to declare these, I doubt we would proceed further than is permitted to write or speak. Nevertheless, we will touch upon something, even if superficially: In this name ישו (Yeshu), therefore, the first letter is י (Yod), which, when explained in its letters by saying יוד (Yod), signifies a thousand, which attribute we have already declared: to our Solomon, who is peace to himself, and a true peaceful King. But if the number of those three letters is calculated, a great mystery still arises: for י (Yod) gives 80, ל (Lamed) 30, א (Aleph) one. Which numbers, joined together, yield 111, namely a hundred, a ten, and a unit, of which we spoke above. And if attention is paid to the characters of the numbers, a mystery will still be foreseen: for there are three emanating from one character, which imports one, so that it is intimated that the Trinity of persons proceeds from and is contained in one unity, just as also in pronouncing א (Aleph) it is necessary to explain it into those three letters mentioned above. We have, therefore, in יוד (Yod) the mystery of unique deity and trinity. But to this is added ל (Lamed), which signifies 30 in number, that is, three tens, to denote celestial virtue fortified by the most holy Trinity, through which God, as through secondary causes, disposes all lower things. All these things, if found in Christ Jesus,

--- Page 720 ---
**TONVS SEXTVS. 290**

It is given: For JESUS is the beginning signified by א, just as He Himself testifies, saying: I am the beginning, who speak to you. And in Him is the nature of the Trinity, while [Marginal note: CHRIST.] He says of the Father: The Father is in me: And again: I and the Father are one. Of the Holy Spirit also He says: He will receive from what is mine. From these things we gather the nature of the Trinity, and that the beginning is in Him, from which it is fitting for Him to have the name importing those two things. And from this we can infer how also the power of the supreme name is contained in Jesus: for that is אהיה (Ehyeh) beginning with א and containing י and a double ה. By which א, to those knowing the mysteries of letters, is denoted the first beginning and the ultimate end, since it signifies one and a thousand, which is the cube of ten, and of the last simple number: Similarly, י signifies the beginning, as its interpretation indicates, and signifies the end, since it is a letter signifying the ultimate number: Hence both letters are divine, and both signify the beginning and the end, which is the same thing: because that which is the beginning of things is also their end: One ה is figured by another: For א is figured from two י's with one ו interposed transversally: Therefore, in the four-letter name, and in the name Jesus, י is placed for א, and for ו itself: And thus we have in the name Jesus the mystery of two letters, and their significations in the one named Himself: because Jesus Himself is the beginning (as we recently said) and is the end giving rest and blessedness. There are also in that supreme name two ה's signifying two emanations of the producer into the things produced: In all these productions the Son intercedes, except for His own production from the Father: Hence He said: My Father works until now, [Marginal note: The same.] and I work, namely, producing all things with Him. Nor let us proceed further in declaring mysteries of this kind, although there are very many. Since therefore the power and mysteries of all names are contained in the name of Jesus, it is no wonder if Paul says that in this name every knee bows, of those in heaven, on earth, [Marginal note: Paul.] and under the earth.

Why only the name of Jesus is invoked today by true worshippers of God. Chapter VIII.

[Decorative initial C containing a figure] Since we have declared all names, and their virtues of every kind, to be contained in Jesus and His name, deservedly we invoke that name alone, according to the prophecy of Zechariah, in which he says: And the Lord will be king [Marginal note: Zacha.] over all the earth, and in that day the Lord will be one, and His name one. Nor is anyone found who has been king of the whole earth and Lord, except Jesus, under whom, with idolatry destroyed, all had Him as King and Lord, with the exception of a few scattered Hebrews, until that beast Mahumeth arose: Nor yet from that time was another name given to men by which they could be saved, except the name of JESUS, as Peter said in the Acts of the Apostles: Which he ordered to be spread among [Marginal note: Peter.] all nations, just as the four-letter name was known only among the Israelite people: For he said to Ananias concerning Paul: This man is a chosen vessel to me, [Marginal note: CHRIST.] that he may bear my name before Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel: which he also did: For immediately from Damascus he went to Jerusalem, then to Tarsus, the metropolis of Cilicia, then to Antioch, an excellent city of Syria, afterwards to Phrygia, Galatia, Troy,

**OO ij**

--- Page 721 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...Macedonia, and Athens, where the wisdom of the world flourished. After these, to Corinth, Ephesus, Miletus, Cos, Rhodes, and through those islands of Achaia and Greece, traveling further, he proceeded to the Arabs, and came into Italy: and he traveled as far as the Spaniards through Asia and Europe, carrying and spreading the name of Jesus: And what remained of the world, the other Apostles completed by the power of this name [Marginal note: CHRIST], so that all and everything could be sought in the name of Jesus, just as He Himself taught, saying: 'Whatever you ask the Father in my name, He will give you:' Of whose name [Marginal note: Paul] there is such power, that all can be enriched in it, as Paul says: 'Rich unto all who invoke Him,' that is, the name JESUS, which is so gentle, so communicable, and diffusive of itself, that it is compared to oil in the Canticles, where it is said: 'Your name is oil poured out,' because its virtue, full of chrism, is diffused into those whom it touches, like oil on cloth: and because it heals, because it preserves, and does all things, like true oil to those who know how to receive and invoke it, just as the Apostles did: For in His name they spoke in tongues, cast out demons, healed the sick: For Peter [Marginal note: Peter] said to the lame man sitting at the Beautiful Gate of the temple: 'Silver and gold I have none, but a better treasure, namely the power of the name of Jesus, in which I command you to rise and walk:' and immediately his feet and ankles were strengthened: and leaping up, he stood walking, and entering the temple, praising God.

Indeed, the power of that name flows, when it is duly invoked, like a river from a spring: For (as Democritus [Marginal note: Democ Epicu.] says, and after him Epicurus) a voice and a sounding name is like a current, or a channel conveying the word of the mind, which is like a spring, giving power to the uttered word and conceiving it: But the true channels of divine names are in the Hebrew idiom with their characters, by which those names were first described with the greatest mystery: Hence Iamblichus [Marginal note: Iambli.] says: 'The Gods, that is, angels acting with us, approved the barbaric language, namely Hebrew, as sufficiently congruent, especially because it was the older and first mode of speaking:' But let us add this: because those characters, both from imported numbers and from the figuration of celestial things, are wonderful and mysterious: Therefore [Marginal note: Zoroa.] Zoroaster, most skilled in working, teaches that barbaric words, that is, Hebrew words, should not be changed in sacred rites: Which the Catholic Church has also observed in many places, as when it commanded to say 'alleluia,' which means 'praise Yah' (יה), which is a divine name of utmost importance, and fruitful of the tetragrammaton name, because with those two full letters it yields in number 26, which is the number of the four-letter name: So also that 'Adonai Lord:' and that 'osianu,' for which we say 'hosanna:' and that, 'Lord God zebaot,' for which the corrupted word 'sabbaot' is said: for this word ('sabbaot') sounds 'rest' in the plural: but that ('zebaot') means 'armies:' for here it should be said 'Lord God of armies.' And the name of our redeemer should be written with only three letters, full of its mystery, namely YHV (יהו). Nor should the letter He (ה) be added as a combination, as some have thought, because those (letters) are already (as we have said) converted into Shin (ש). Nor should a second Shin (ש) be appended by saying YHShW (יהושו), although it is said in Latin, following the order of grammatical declension: About which we do not care much...

--- Page 722 ---
**TONUS SEXTUS.** **291**

...it is not very important, because mysteries are not in the Latin idiom, but in Hebrew, where care must be taken not to add or subtract anything: because many mysteries would be destroyed, which are contained as much in the meanings of the letters of that name, as in their numbers, and also in corresponding prophecies: from which we will briefly touch upon some or a few. The more recondite Theologians [Marginal note: Theolo.] hold it as constant that oracles often contain the names of those about whom prophecy is made, at the beginning, end, or middle of words: according to which method the name of the Messiah is frequently found, as in the verse of the seventy-first psalm: 'Before the sun His name endures, and in Him shall all the tribes [Marginal note: psalm.] of the earth be blessed.' For the name ישו Iesu (Jesus) is contained in the initial letters of these words, 'permanet nomen eius, & benedicentur' (His name endures, and they shall be blessed), which in Hebrew are thus said: ינון שמו וית ברכו (inin semo ueit barcu): where if the initial letters of the words are taken, which are י ש ו, they constitute ישו Iesu (Jesus): Which name was before the sun, and in Him all nations were blessed. Similarly in the book [Marginal note: Gen: 49.] of Genesis, chapter 49, where it is said: 'Let the Messiah come, and to Him shall they be gathered,' the initial letters of the words constitute the name Iesu, which in Hebrew are thus said: יבא שלו ולו (iabo silo uelo). For the initial letters are י ש ו: Which letters, placed in Hebrew order, render ישו (Iesu). But more wonderfully, in the ninety-fifth psalm, in those words: 'Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth exult, let the sea tremble, and all its fullness; let the fields exult, and all that is in them': In the initial letters of these words is found the complete four-letter name: And afterwards the same name without the last ה: Then the name Iesu, to denote that that four-letter name ought to be encompassed in the name Iesu, as its successor, to whom it in a certain way yielded, because the power of that four-letter name was given to Iesu, to whom the Father gave all things: Whence the author of Sepher Temunot [Marginal note: Se. Te.] proves by that last ה of the four-letter name itself, that divinity ought to be united with humanity, and become Messiah, in whom the power of that great name would exist: Therefore the names are united, and the name Iesu succeeds that incomplete four-letter name, when it is repeated a second time: Because, just as in the prior testimony the complete name was venerated, so in the second and last it is implied to have yielded (as we said) to our Iesu: For the Hebrew words of the text of that psalm are thus found: ישמחו השמים ותגל הארץ ירעם הים ומלואו יעלוז שדי וכל: The initial letters of which words, placed in Hebrew order, are יהו ה יהו ש.

But since we are discussing the letters of the name Iesu, I deemed it opportune to also explain why, from the interpretation of the letters, no more letters should be found in it, since these perfectly convey what is contained in the one named by this name ישו (Iesu): For י signifies the beginning, ו itself, and ש the beginning of Sabbath, hinting at rest itself, and the end. They denote, therefore, that He Himself is the beginning, the end, and the rest of all things, just as in the Apocalypse [Marginal note: Apocal.] He Himself says: 'I am α and ω: the beginning and the end.' And since all things are included in these words, those letters suffice, nor should others be added. Furthermore, this name ישו (Iesu) is completed from the greater, lesser, and middle numbers into a denary, which is a complete number: For it is a six, one ten, and three hundreds, which, joined together, constitute ten, indeed a perfect number, and constituted from all kinds of things, namely spiritual, celestial, and terrestrial, which are conveyed by numbers, denaries,
**OO iij**

--- Page 723 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

[Paul.] and centenaries, according to that which Paul often repeats, saying: In him is all fullness, and in him all things are reconciled. But leaving aside lesser things, so that we may speak of higher things, I say that all the supernal waters of graces and gifts are collected in him, as in a true upper pool, of which it is said in the Canticles: [Canti.] Your eyes are like pools in Heshbon, that is, in thought or word, in which all things were contained before they were created: for Heshbon signifies thoughts leading to the word: Hence, where we have, In the beginning was the word, in Hebrew it is בראשית היה חשבון (bereshit hayah heshbon), that is, there was thought, word, pool, in which all things were contained before they were created. There is again a true probatic pool, in which all the sheep to be placed on the right hand of the supreme Judge ought to be washed: Which pool was prefigured by that one which was in earthly Jerusalem, in which one person was healed, whoever he might have been, and by whatever infirmity he might have been held, because by the unique method of healing in the divine word, all are healed from whatever sickness, according to that of the prophet: [Dauid] He sent his word, and healed them. These are few, or very small, in comparison to those things which could be said about this most holy name, which was named by God, announced by an angel, imposed by parents, celebrated by the world, venerated by every kind, and placed for salvation for all, yet for error for demons, and for power for those who work: For in seraphim it inflames with fiery power: In cherubim it shines: In thrones it binds together: In dominations it commands: In virtues it executes: In powers it restrains: In principalities it cares for provinces, princes, and magistrates: In archangels, performing priestly office, it directs mortals to God: In angels it cares for all our things: In man, by the bond of all things, it works all things: For it teaches and speaks in various tongues in the apostles: it shines with truth in evangelists and doctors: it is diffused with power in those who work miracles: it fills contemplatives with sweetness: it grants pardon to penitents: and every kind of help to all in need. Nor should we proceed further to the particular virtues of this name, in which all things must now be sought by us: because since we have demonstrated that all things are included in him and depend on him, I would deem it superfluous to labor through each one individually.

How we have Christ prefigured from sacred scripture as the fount of all merit, grace, and glory. Chapter IX.

**V**T the named one may correspond to the name, just as we have proven that all things are contained in the name, so it is necessary that in the named one himself is contained all virtue, all merit, and all grace, from whom, as from the fount of the true paradise of delights, the whole earth is watered. But leaving aside what has already been treated as trivial by our Theologians in their proper places, we will only briefly touch upon some things which are hidden in the divine oracles: And first, we will unravel those things which have been prefigured by deeds: afterwards, those which have been foretold by divine oracles: For when the Pharisees sought a true sign of the Messiah's advent, [CHRI STVS.] Christ responded: This generation seeks a sign, and no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah.

--- Page 724 ---
TOMVS SEXTVS. 292

...Christ responded: This generation seeks a sign, and no sign will be given to it, except the sign of Jonah...
of the prophet: For just as Jonah was in the belly of the whale for three days and three nights, so
will the Son of Man be in the heart of the earth for three days and three nights. This saying of Christ must be attended to,
by which he not without reason preferred the sign of Jonah to other signs, because in it is included that
for which Christ had especially come, (human redemption through the fullness of grace and merit:
Of which thing (as far as a mere man could) Jonah bore a most elegant type: Therefore, omitting others, in which
the trinity of days was celebrated, he only expounded Jonah and brought him forth as a sign:
For the sons of Israel, having set out from Mount Ephraim, traveled a way of three things: and
walked for three days through the desert of Etham: And Daniel stood in the lions'
den, and the three youths in the furnace, and Joseph in prison prophesying through a three-day
period, yet these signs are nowhere brought forth by the Savior as an example and type,
but only Jonah, because in him alone was the progress of redemption celebrated:
which, that we may explain it, we will begin from the name: For Jonah is interpreted as "dove," a most simple
animal, which was offered for the purification of the birth of a woman cursed
and condemned by original sin, so that she might give birth with pain and uncleanness:
Therefore, it aptly prefigures Christ, innocent and meek, offered for the washing away
and purification of all defilements which we have contracted through sin.
But let us enter into deeper mysteries. To this Jonah God had commanded that he preach
to the erring Ninevites: And to Christ the Father commanded that he preach and redeem
the whole lost world. Jonah feared to undertake the imposed burden, and strove to flee:
And the Son of God began to fear and be weary, and to seek escape to the Father, saying:
Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me. Jonah fled to the exceedingly
high sea, that is, and to the waters of mercy and grace, which he procured for the Ninevites:
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
And Christ fled to the waters to which he invited the thirsty, and through which he saved
and cleansed us: As a sign of which cleansing, he rightly instituted elemental water.
A storm arose in the sea from Jonah's flight, or from the pardon obtained for the Ninevites,
a contention having been made before the tribunal of divine justice, which was unwilling to permit
the crimes of the Ninevites to go unpunished. In a similar way, a storm arose and was stirred up
in heaven and on earth, because the same tribunal did not suffer that the human race should be liberated
by the sole intercession of the redeemer, without worthy repentance for their sins:
(John says) a great battle took place in heaven not only from the rebellion of the dragon
and his satellites, but also because they were unwilling to suffer that the human race
should be redeemed, especially without a worthy punishment: For they sought food
for themselves from God, so that they might devour the human race according to their misdeeds.
Jonah offered himself to suffer for the Ninevites, saying: "Take me, and cast me into the sea,
and the sea will cease from you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest has come:
but I do not refuse to be cast into the sea, to quiet these tumults stirred up against the sins of the Ninevites,
for whose pardon I have prayed." In a similar way, Christ, seeing the whole tribunal of God
agitated, and demanding vengeance for the evil deeds of the human race, and that it could not be appeased
while justice stood, the Son of God himself said: "Behold, I am here, cast into this..."
                                                                                                                              OO iiij

--- Page 725 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

sea, myself ready to undertake all punishment which is owed to all transgressors who are in this worldly sea. Concerning this offering made of old, [Marginal note: Isaiah, Gospel] Isaiah spoke, when in his person he said: Behold I, send me. But concerning the same deed shown forth, we have in the Gospel, when the Eternal Father sent an angel to Him, who feared to drink the cup of suffering, yet was always ready to obey the paternal command, to strengthen Him and to explain what was being agitated by the divine tribunal. For [Marginal note: Isaiah] then He Himself, just as He had said before to the Father, "not my will, but yours be done," fulfilled it in deed, offering Himself (as Isaiah had prophesied) because He Himself willed it. And then He took upon Himself the iniquities of all of us, which the Father laid upon Him. And then He bore all our sorrows, which were so many and so great, that Jeremiah cries out: Your ruin is great like the sea. And although Jonah took upon himself the sins of the Ninevites, and Christ the sins of the whole world, it was necessary nevertheless that both the Ninevites and the peoples of the whole world should receive some part of the punishment, suffering along with Him themselves, as was just. Therefore Jonah, entering Nineveh, preached repentance, declaring that by a sentence already passed, for forty days they ought to suffer the punishment of overthrow, if indeed the execution of the sentence should be changed through repentance. [Marginal note: CHRIST] Therefore, to change this, all, from the greatest to the least, were clothed in sackcloth, and the city was saved. In like manner, Christ also, when sent by the Father, began to preach, and thus He began: Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand; whose restoration I have obtained for you, provided you are willing to suffer with me and repent, that is, to return to God, which is true repentance. [Marginal note: The Same] Hence again He says: Unless you repent, you will all likewise perish, granted that I have done, and will do, what is in me, that you may not perish, because it is necessary (justice so demanding) that you also cooperate. But Christ complains about the world, and especially about the Hebrews, preferring the Ninevites, and saying: [Marginal note: in the same place] The men of Nineveh will rise up in judgment against this generation and condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, something greater than Jonah is here. For he was a shadowy and figurative savior, destined only for one people, who, having relapsed, finally perished. But Christ, the true savior for the whole human race, entered once into the holy places, eternal redemption having been found, giving us continuously grace, by which we can do those things which pertain to salvation, and imparting of the merits acquired for us, and finally bestowing glory most abundantly prepared. Whence by His grace we do good, and by His merits we come to salvation and glory.

**The Same is proven by prophecies. Chapter X.**

[Large decorative initial N] Or do we have this only from figure, but also proven by many oracles. For the royal prophet, seeing the human race to have transgressed and to need a redeemer, who by merits, and grace, and pardon obtained, might succor the needy, says in the person of the redeemer, [Marginal note: David] as Paul rightly interprets: [Marginal note: Paul] For if you had desired sacrifice, I would have given it,

--- Page 726 ---
**VOLUME SIX.**
**293**

of animals, namely, but you did not desire sacrifice and offering, but rather you prepared ears, or a body (as Paul says) for me, my body namely, to be offered for the redemp- [Marginal note: Paulus.]
tion of transgressors. In the volume of the book it is written of me, that I should do your will, my God I desired, and your law in the midst of my heart: Indeed, in the head, or in the volume (as the Hebrew truth has it) of the book of life, Messiah was written above all, and before all: who also himself (Paul says) was predestined in power. For it is written, that I should do your will, by doing which I might merit for myself, and for all others. My God I desired, and I agreed to undertake this burden: for he said: Nevertheless, not my will, but yours be done: And your law, by which you commanded sins to be punished by blood, and the transgressor to be redeemed through me, this I held in the midst of my heart: And this your justice, by which you command all sins to be purged by a true sacrifice, and all debts to be paid by him who is rich unto all who call upon him. I announced not only in the synagogue of the Jews, but in the church, and great congregation of all nations, for whom I offered myself as a true sacrifice: Of which all those ancient immolations were figures, not indeed expiating, but appeasing the accusers, until the true sacrifice, purging and justifying, should be offered: Whence, with great mystery, the book of Leviticus, in [Marginal note: Leuiti.]
which sacrifices are treated, begins with ויקרא (Vayikra): Where, not without mystery, the scripture says at the beginning of the volume: 'And He called Moses,' not expressing who called, as it was accustomed to say: 'And the Lord called,' and 'And the Lord spoke,' and suchlike: Whence it must be inquired, who called, since it was not without mystery omitted at this beginning of the book, which it was accustomed to do throughout its entire progress: But if the number carried by the letters of that beginning, which is ויקרא, is calculated, the mystery begins to be investigated: for those letters (as is clear to one who knows how to calculate) give 316, with א added: where Jesus (ישו) is hinted at, which name imports the same in number: and it is the name of Him who gave power to all sacrifices: To whom א is added, signifying the Father existing with the Son, and working all things with Him, just as the Son Himself testifies saying: 'My Father works until now, and I work:' And again: [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.]
'I do nothing of myself, but as the Father taught me, these things I speak:' And 'He who sent me is with me.' From this Messiah, therefore, full of paternal divine power, the book begins, where it treats of sacrifices to be offered to the Father himself, and bearing the type of the true sacrifice, which Messiah himself offered, and by virtue of which those shadowy sacrifices were offered. This is He, therefore, who existing not only before Moses, but before Abraham was, called and stirred up Moses, that he might do those things which prefigured Him: and that he might write of Him in the head of the book, and in the beginning of Genesis, and in the beginning of this volume: Which He well knew, of whom it was written: who said to the lawyers, as it is found in the Gospel of John: 'If you believed Moses, you would perhaps believe me also: [Marginal note: Idem.]
for he wrote of me.' It is not found where Moses clearly wrote of Him: but if He, who alone has the keys to open the scriptures, would lend them to us, we would be able to open and unravel from a thousand, and almost infinite places, where Moses wrote—

**OO v.**

--- Page 727 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

Zacha. [marginal note] wrote about him: but let us proceed. Zechariah also reveals the same mystery, speaking in familiar language with the redeemer, and saying: "You also, by the blood of your covenant, have brought forth your prisoners from the pit." Through which blood He redeemed us, paid all debts, and acquired for us all grace and merit, as Peter says: "To obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace be multiplied."
How clearly Isaiah revealed all these things in a single oracle. Chapter XI.
Isaias. [marginal note] [Decorative initial I] saiah, however, describes this matter so openly that it seems not a prophecy but an already manifested gospel (as Jerome says): For he says: "The Lord has prepared His arm, and indeed His right arm, that is, of mercy and and grace, in the eyes of all nations:" Which arm was previously extended only to the Israelite people: From which follows: "All the ends of the earth shall see the salvation, or the health, or the savior of our God," whom He will send, of course, for the redemption of all. Afterwards, the prophet, directing his discourse to the Gentiles, adds: "Depart, depart from the worship, namely, of demons and idols: Touch no unclean thing," that is, things offered to idols. "Go out from the midst of her," that is, from the worship of idolatry, "and be clean from all your defilements and pollutions."
"You who bear the vessels of the Lord," that is, you who have receptive capacities for divinity, so much so that you are called the temple and dwelling place of God: or you who perform the priestly office, no longer offer to your idols the vessels which you ought to give to the Lord: the vessels, indeed, in which you place sacrifices, or the vessels that are yourselves, as the oracle said of Paul: "This man is a chosen vessel to me:" Or (as Jerome understands it) you Apostles, who bear the vessels, that is, the power by which you can baptize the people, depart from the obstinate, blasphemous, and wicked Jews, for whose destruction the Roman army is prepared.
Nor shall you depart in haste, as they once did from Egypt, but the Lord, and the Prince of Peace, will go before you, who says: "I am with you always, even to the consummation of the age." This work, therefore, though arduous, will be done without clamor and tumult: because it will be without the slaughter of peoples, indeed, with their salvation, although many will suffer death as a testimony to the preached faith and doctrine:
Sapien. [marginal note] because it will be done with the peace of those who endure, as it is said in the Book of Wisdom: "In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure was taken for misery: but they are in peace." And this is what the prophet continues with: "For we shall undertake this work not in tumult, nor shall you go out from it with tumult, nor shall you hasten to execute it with flight:" "For the Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will gather, or associate, you."
"Behold, my servant," that is, the truly Israelite people, "shall understand, and shall be exalted, and shall be lifted up, and shall be exceeding high:" For from him were chosen the Apostles, who were appointed over the universal Church, and constituted as assessors of the prince, who himself also drew his origin from the same Israelite people, and many others from the same stock were exalted in various ways. And "as many were astonished at you," when, namely, I drew you out of Egyptian servitude, and set you over the nations, and exalted you with many wonders and miracles, and gave you dominion over nations and kingdoms, "so shall they be astonished at this Redeemer."

--- Page 728 ---
**TONE SIX. 294**

and his work: For he who previously seemed inglorious, and vile among men, and whose appear-
ance was not esteemed among the sons of men, he will sprinkle many nations, cleansing
them, namely, with his blood: Therefore, the kings of the world will shut their mouths
before him with reverence: For those to whom it was not told about him have seen: and those who did not
hear, namely the prophets speaking, have contemplated this great mystery:
Which is so great and arduous, that I can scarcely hope to persuade anyone,
if I wished to explain it: Whence it follows: Lord, who will believe our report, that is,
what we shall cause to be heard? Or to whom has the power and arm of the Lord, full of mer-
cy, grace, and piety, been revealed? that it may be exercised and appear in him, who
ascended like a shoot before him, namely from earthly flesh, and like a
root from thirsty ground, that is, human nature dry of merits and works, and depri-
ved of divine influences, by which it might merit eternal life. There is no form for him,
nor beauty of divinity, or of a redeemer, since he appears as a mere man, and is judged
to be born in the common way. We saw him, and there was no appearance such as to do
those things which surpassed all other works: For he renewed and changed all things, and
more hidden virtues and dispositions, than those visible to bodily eyes: We indeed
desired him, but this one appears as a despised pauper, a fugitive from his homeland, the least
of men: A man, indeed, of sorrows, and subject to infirmities and natural passions:
and full of torments, by which even the greatest assassins are afflicted. And because
his face was hidden, and despised by many, therefore we did not esteem him, nor
did we think him to be who he truly was: But truly he bore our infirmities,
and he carried our sorrows, found in appearance as a man: Who knew (says Paul) [Marginal note: Paulus]
to sympathize with our infirmities, tempted in all things: Or he bore infirmi-
ties, and sorrows, because he healed the sick and oppressed, as Matthew explains in [Marginal note: Matth.]
the eighth chapter of his gospel. He also carried our burden, namely of sins, which
is the greatest. And we thought him stricken, smitten by God,
and humbled, and not to have voluntarily taken on those wounds for our redemp-
tion: But he himself was weakened because of our crimes, or transgressions,
and was crushed because of our iniquities: Which is greatest: For by
the law no one was justified, except from sin contracted through ignorance, or through
mental oversight, and suchlike, as we explained above: But from iniquity,
which they call עון (avon), and from transgression, or rebellion, which [Marginal note: Dauid]
they name פשע (pesha), and from impiety, which they call רשע (rasha), by no means [was one justified]: Therefore Da-
vid, having committed adultery, which is iniquity: and homicide, which is called
impiety, knowing that such things were not cleansed by sacrifices, said: For if you had [Marginal note: Paulus]
desired sacrifice, I would have given it; you would certainly not be delighted with burnt offerings. Hence Paul, arguing
with the Romans, says: No one will be justified by the law. But such people were
commanded to be stoned, or to be expiated by some kind of their own death: from all of which
the coming Messiah liberated us: therefore the prophet continues: The chastisement of peace, that is, the way
of acquiring reconciliation with God, was upon him, and by his bruise we are healed:

--- Page 729 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

For all of us, like sheep, have gone astray, each one has turned to his own way, all were subject to sins and iniquities, and to those liabilities, from which they could not be rescued: Therefore the Lord laid upon him the iniquities of us all: Which work, although with the resistance of the sensitive part, yet he voluntarily undertook: whence it follows: "He was offered, because he himself willed it." Hence he said to Peter, who was trying to rescue him from the hand of those capturing him: [CHRIST] "The cup, which the Father has given me, do you not wish that I drink it?" And when Peter previously abhorred the name and work of the cross, he said to him: "Get behind me, Satan, you are a stumbling block to me, for you do not savor the things that are of God, but those that are of men." Because therefore he voluntarily undertook this work, for that reason he did not open his mouth in his own defense, but stood as if mute before Herod and Pilate, who were seeking to free him: whence it follows. "Like a sheep he will be led to slaughter, and like a lamb before its shearer he will be silent:" Indeed he was the Lamb taking away the sins of the world, and all crimes, which could not be expiated by any sacrifice, sacrificed in the true Passover, and passage to a better life.

Therefore, because of the anguish endured for us, and the judgment, and the sentence which he sustained for us, he was accepted and glorified. And since he did those things which no man can do, therefore he is proven to be above man: whence the prophet adds: "Who will declare his generation?" For he was cut off from the land, not of the dying, but of the living, who had come to give us life. "For the iniquity of my people he was struck," or "a wound was inflicted upon him," so that it may be the voice of the eternal Father, or of the prophet narrating, although we have "he was struck" so that it may be expressly understood that it is the paternal voice. It follows: "And he will grant his burial to the wicked," that is, by his death and burial he will grant the sins of the peoples, and will obtain pardon for them: "And he will acquire riches in his death:" Indeed he will be rich towards all who will invoke that name which the Father gave him: because he became obedient even unto the death of the cross. Nor did he commit iniquity, nor was deceit found in his mouth, [yet] it was necessary for him to suffer for the expiation he himself provided: therefore for our sake the Lord willed to crush him. And because he himself knew that if he exposed his soul for the sin of the people, he would see a long-lived offspring, he voluntarily surrendered it: whence he saw his offspring expanded and multiplied more than that of Abraham, which was innumerable like the stars of heaven and the sand of the sea: For beyond the chosen and consecrated princes, he begot a great multitude, which no one could number. His offspring was also long-lived, because his family endures forever, and possesses an everlasting kingdom, as it is said in the psalm: [Psalm.] "His offspring endures forever, and his throne, like the Sun in my sight:" And again: "And I will place his offspring for ever and ever

--- Page 730 ---
TOMVS SEXTVS. 295
justice: for they themselves shall be satisfied. In his knowledge, that just one shall justify many of my servants: For the spirit of wisdom and knowledge had descended upon him, by which, knowing what is pleasing to God and what is required for our justification, he diligently sought to accomplish all those things, bearing the iniquities of those very servants of God. It follows: Therefore I will divide, or apportion to him, very many; assigning them to him among peoples, to whom he himself may divide and distribute from his fullness: For he shall divide the spoils of the strong, that is, of the princes of darkness, as the Apostle says: "You have stripped principalities, [Marginal note: Paulus.] and powers." Of whom also the Royal prophet sings: "The beauty, or comeliness of the [Marginal note: Dauid] house, to divide spoils." Which spoils he brought back from the victory obtained in his death, therefore it is added: "Because he delivered his soul unto death," indeed an ignominious death, whence it follows: "And he was numbered with the wicked or rebellious." But he himself bore the sins of many, namely, of those who desire the benefit of his redemption and to carry the cross, following him. And for transgressors, or rebels, or his crucifiers, he prayed, saying: "Father, forgive them." [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] And not only for his crucifiers, but for all others, as Paul says: "In the days of his flesh, he offered [Marginal note: Paulus] up prayers with tears and strong crying, and was heard because of his reverence."

From all that has been said before, it is concluded that Jesus was the fulfillment, not only of the works of God, but also of our operations and merits, and consequently, giving us the means by which we may work. Cap. XII.

[Large decorative initial C containing a landscape scene] Since therefore our Messiah and Christ has been, through whom all things were made before, and is the author and finisher of faith, and filling all things with his divinity, existing as part and whole, and in a certain way existing as all things in all things, vivifying all members of the mystical body, like the human soul, extending himself even to artificial things and our works, as we can learn from the proper name full of sacraments and his cognomens imposed not by chance, but from events and accommodated mysteries, so much so that only his name is invoked by true worshipers: and since he himself has taken upon himself all our weaknesses, infirmities, and debts, so that we, being free, may work more readily, he has deservedly become the one through whom we do all things, as Paul says: "I can do all things [Marginal note: Idem.] through him who strengthens me." And again: "But it is the same God who works all things in all." Who is God arranging all things in Christ Jesus, whence he himself says in plain [Marginal note: CHRI STVS,] speech: "Without me you can do nothing." And "If anyone does not abide in me, he will be cast out and wither, and they will throw him into the fire, and he burns," as, God willing, we shall more openly reveal at the end of this second volume. Therefore, we must have recourse to him, the giver of all good things and the true mediator, and through him all things must be implored from the Father, so that, with his assent, he may give us from the fullness of his riches: enriched by which we may honorably appear in the sight of such a great prince: Of whose dominion and kingdom we must now discourse.

--- Page 731 ---
OF THE SECOND CANTICLE
Christ is King of kings, and supreme Emperor moderating
all things. Seventh Tone.

[Large decorative initial C] HRIST was foretold to be the true Lord by Mosaic prophecies. Chap. I.
The same is proven by the oracles of other prophets. Chap. II.
Why Christ is not said to reign in the house of Abraham, since the promise concerning him was first made to him. Chap. III.
Why he does not reign even in the house of Isaac, to whom the promise was made a second time. Chap. IIII.
Why it was said by the oracle, "Jesus shall reign in the house of Jacob forever." Chap. V.
Concerning the fruits of this house, in which Christ reigns. Chap. VI.
What this house is according to the allegorical sense. Chap. VII.
With what great harmony those Apostolic tribes are distributed according to the division of the figurative family, and the signs of the star-bearing heaven. Chap. VIII.
By what distribution, and with what mystery, each figurative tribe pitched its camps according to the aspects of the heavens. Chap. IX.
Into how many trigons (triangles) the heavens are divided, and to which trigon, or sign, each region is subject. Chap. X.
In which provinces, and to which subject signs, each of the apostles preached. Chap. XI.
Concerning the agreement of the Apostles with the celestial signs. Chap. XII.
The tribes also agree with the images, according to whose aspects they will encamp. Chap. XIII.
Concerning the harmony of the blessings which Jacob gave to his twelve sons, with the twelve peoples to whom the twelve Apostles preached, according to the order of the signs to which they correspond. Chap. XIIII.
Digression, why the primary order will not be observed. Chap. XV.
Continuation of the harmony of the blessings of Issachar and Zebulun with their peoples. Chap. XVI.
Concerning the harmony of the blessing given to Judah, with the people directed by the sign corresponding to it. Chap. XVII.
Concerning the harmony of the blessings of the other two tribes of this trigon with the signs and peoples corresponding to them. Chap. XVIII.
Concerning the harmony of the blessings of the three families, who pitched their camps against the third trigon, with the peoples directed by it. Chap. XIX.
Concerning the harmony of the blessings of the remaining three tribes, who encamped against the fourth trigon, with the peoples directed by it. Chap. XX.
Digression, why no particular tribe or region was assigned to the most celebrated Apostle Paul. Chap. XXI.
What is meant in the encampment around the tabernacle of the covenant by that interposed triple company. Chap. XXII.
What the seventy-two disciples signify, whom our prince JESUS is said to have chosen in the Gospel. Chap. XXIII.
That Christ rules and governs the entire mystical and worldly body. Chap. XXIIII.
This is explained by an oracle. Chap. XXV.

--- Page 732 ---
**VOLUME SEVEN.**
**296**

**THAT CHRIST IS THE TRUE LORD FORETOLD BY MOSAIC PROPHECIES.**
**Chapter One.**

[Large decorative initial V] TO RELATE, even in part, what the Holy Spirit foretold through the mouths of the prophets concerning the dominion and kingdom of our Christ, we must begin with Moses. For the Lawgiver [Marginal note: Moses.] when speaking of the generation of man, seems to describe his production twice: First, he relates that He created them male and female, in His image and likeness: Afterwards, as if he had said nothing about man, he says in the following [verses]: "Nor was there a man to work the ground, whence the Lord God formed man from the dust of the earth, or from the dust of the ground, and breathed into his face the breath of life." Nor is it to be thought that so great a man, most learned in all wisdom, full of God, and imbued with the Holy Spirit, was struck with such dullness as to forget what he had said a little earlier, and repeat his formation again, whom he had already described as made in the likeness and image of God, and constituted Lord of all things: And by the same reasoning, after he had related that male and female had been produced, he immediately, forgetting what he had said, adds: "And for man there was not found a helper like himself, or one that stood before him," as the truth of the letter has it: For who could ascribe such mental sluggishness to so great a man, that he should repeat the same thing twice in vain, he who did not insert even a superfluous iota in his description? Therefore, to remove this apparent error from a man full of God and from the sacred scriptures, we reveal from the most sacred treasuries (as those most skilled in these matters affirm) that Moses first described the Messiah and the production of his mother: Of whom Christ is with the true image of God, and the firstborn of all, as Paul says: [Marginal note: Paul] "Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature." And He himself was made male, and she herself female, in the divine mind, first, and before, and above all others: To whom also He subjected all things, saying: "Have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the air, and over the beasts of the earth, and over all living things that move upon the earth:" Singing of this, the divine Psalmist [Marginal note: David] says: "You have crowned him with glory and honor, and have set him over the works of your hands: You have subjected all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, moreover also the beasts of the field, the birds of the air, and the fish of the sea, and those who walk the paths of the sea." And that this is sung of Christ, Paul, the revealer of mysteries, explains with open speech to the Corinthians and [Marginal note: Paul] Hebrews, saying that those things were foretold of Christ, and coming to that word, "You have subjected all things under his feet," he says: [Marginal note: The same] "In that he subjected all things, he left nothing not subjected, except him who subjected all things, to whom that Son was subjected:" Whom (as it follows with the Hebrews) we saw, because of the suffering of his death, crowned with glory and honor (as it is said in the psalm). To whom, male and female, it was said: "Increase and multiply," not indeed by carnal multiplication, but by spiritual and divine [multiplication], as it has happened: so much so, that from the fulness

--- Page 733 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

...so much so that from the fullness of the divine merit and grace of the man, and from the fullness of the grace and mercy of the woman, we have all received, as wise and holy men everywhere attest. Also, Jacob is introduced by Moses, prophesying to his son Judah, and saying:
[Marginal note: Jacob] The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a leader from his thigh, or a lawgiver from between his feet (as the literal truth has it) until he comes who is to be sent: and he shall be the expectation of the nations. But better (as
[Marginal note: Onkelos.] the Hebrew truth has it) until Shiloh comes: Which Targum Onkelos, most celebrated among the Hebrews, has in Chaldean as Messiah: Whose words are:
לא יעדי עביד שלטנא מדבית יהודה וספרא מבני בנוהי עד עלמא עד דייתי
משיחא דדיליה היא מלכותא וליה ישתמעון עממיא
Which, interpreting word for word, says: A ruler shall not depart from the house of Judah, nor a scribe, or teacher
from his children's children until the age, until Messiah comes: and his shall be the
[Marginal note: David Kimhi.] kingdom, and to him shall the peoples, or nations, obey. To whom David Kimhi assents, bringing many arguments by which he proves that Messiah ought to be understood by Shiloh. Nor are
the more recent Hebrews to be listened to, who variously and always erroneously interpret those
[Marginal note: Nebuchadnezzar.] words, so that they may defend their obstinacy: For some say that this Shiloh was Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, sent by God to punish the sins of the Jewish nation:
who put an end to the kingdom of Judah, with King Zedekiah led captive into Babylon, and the city and temple devastated: so much so that there was never afterwards a king in Jerusalem, nor in the house of Judah: And they say that this Nebuchadnezzar was the expectation of the nations: because under him the dominion and empire of the nations was expanded: But these are truly more to be laughed at and hissed at than listened to: because Shiloh does not signify "one sent": nor was Nebuchadnezzar the expectation of the nations, nor were other nations gathered to him, other than the Chaldeans, Persians, and Medes, which are but a small part in respect to other nations. Nor did the Jewish scepter entirely fail under Nebuchadnezzar: because after the people were brought back from captivity, there were many leaders in that tribe. Others say that it took place in Saul, who was of the tribe of Benjamin, anointed king in Shiloh: because then the glory of the kingdom and the scepter of Judah passed to the tribe of Benjamin: Which is no less ridiculous than the first: since the scepter of the kingdom had not been taken away from Judah, for the decree of God, that that tribe should have a king, had not yet been put into execution, just as it had always been royal by divine sanction. Therefore (as the wiser Hebrews say) Jacob believed more in the promise made by Judah for Benjamin's return, than in the other ten sons
[Marginal note: Genesis] vouching for him, as we read in the book of Genesis. This royal scepter, therefore, was granted by God to the tribe of Judah from the beginning, granted for a short time to the tribe of Benjamin, and immediately restored to the tribe of Judah in David, while Saul was still alive: And the kingdom endured in that family for fourteen generations, until the Babylonian captivity: after which there were still leaders from the tribe of Judah, such as Zerubbabel, and those who followed. Nor was Saul anointed in Shiloh, but in Kiriath-jearim (as some say) or in the land of Zuph, as it is found in the first book of Kings. I have also found in our time some impudently asserting that the oracle took place

--- Page 734 ---
**VOLUME SEVEN.** 297

in Jeroboam: because then ten tribes were taken away from the Judean scepter, and given to Jeroboam himself, who was of the tribe of Ephraim, as Ahijah the Shilonite had predicted to him: They say therefore: Until Shiloh comes, that is, Ahijah of Shiloh: Which can by no means stand: because the kingdom was not then taken away from the tribe of Judah, but only diminished, the kingdom remaining in Rehoboam and his descendants for twelve more generations: and afterwards there were very many leaders: in whom the scepter still persevered: For שבט *shebet*, which we have translated as 'scepter', can refer to both Leaders and Kings, as it is found in the book of Judges, where it is said: [Marginal note: Judges] From Machir came down commanders, and from Zebulun, those who would lead the army to battle: or as the Hebrew truth has it: And from Zebulun drawing, or leading with the scribe's staff: where in Hebrew שבט *shebet* is found, which can stand neither in Latin nor in Hebrew for a royal scepter, since there was never a kingdom in the tribe of Zebulun, but indeed a leadership and a leader's staff. Indeed, there were in the tribe of Judah even after the Babylonian captivity leaders, and great law-givers, or interpreters, or teachers of the law until Herod the Ascalonite, in the thirty-first year of whose reign our Christ was born: Nor before him, after the scepter was given to the people and to that tribe of Judah, did any foreigner reign over them, nor in the region assigned to them. Then therefore the scepter was taken away from that tribe, which had been silent during the Babylonian captivity: And it was not taken away inauspiciously, but most auspiciously by the Messiah: because it was changed for the better, namely from temporal and earthly to perpetual and heavenly: And this by the Messiah himself, who was of the same tribe, and the true King of kings, and Lord of lords, although his kingdom did not appear in this world: indeed, so that he might devote himself to the heavenly kingdom, having become the true example for all, he abstained from this temporal one: although he had full dominion in it, as he himself testified saying: [Marginal note: CHRIST,] All power has been given to me in heaven and on earth: With which power, even while acting as a human, he used at will, commanding the sea and winds, multiplying loaves and fishes, expelling various infirmities and vexations, but most especially despoiling the prince of this world, and casting him out. But he now rules much more felicitously in it, although he has fixed his seat in the heavens: for a name has been given to him, to whom every knee bows, of those in heaven, on earth, and under the earth. This therefore is the Messiah, Christ, and anointed above all as true king, priest, and prophet, to whom all nations are gathered, as it is found in the text ולו יקהת עמים (velo ichebat bamim): which is thus interpreted word for word: And to him shall be gathered a nation, or a people: For which our translation has: And he will be the expectation of the nations. For indeed, to no one reigning from the Israelite family have the nations been gathered, so that they might obey his dominion, except to Christ: to whom the whole world has adhered, and from every nation under heaven: for he will draw all, even enemies, to himself by his power, as the oracle had previously said: Your hands are on the necks of your enemies, and the sons of your Father will worship you, of the heavenly Father, indeed, who rules over all, and is called the Father of all. Therefore he extends his dominion and kingdom even to foreigners, as far as; just as the divine PP

--- Page 735 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

The lyre-player sings: Judah is my King, that is, Adonai, or the incarnate tetragrammaton, is my king: For יהודה Judah is written in Hebrew from the four letters of the great quadriliteral name with the letter ד dalet inserted, which signifies four, that is, the squaring of the bodily mass. The prophet continues: Moab is the pot of my hope, that is, to be purged in the furnace, or by fire, and in the pot of probation, so that it may be an example to all who are converted. Over Edom I will extend my sandal, that is, humanity, with which the Edomite people are shod and clothed, and the whole human race stripped and made naked by the sin of the first man, and also by those things which each one commits. And because even foreign nations are redeemed by Him; therefore it follows: Foreigners are subject to me. Hence the royal scepter, confined to the tribe of Judah, has been so expanded in Christ, that it is extended not only to that family and the Israelite house, but to all things, since all things are subject to Christ. Then that was fulfilled which follows: He will tie his foal to the vine, and his donkey, the son of my [Hieron.] vine, to the branches or shoots: By the foal, however (as Jerome rightly understands), is meant the Gentile people, new in faith, and a son of mercy and grace, who is [CHRIST.] tied to that vine which says: I am the vine: But the donkey is the mother of the church, [CHRIST.] whose son is both the Gentile people and the Israelite people, but the former is new and a foal, while the latter is already long-lived, perhaps indicated by the two sons, one of whom, having received his portion from his father, squandered and consumed it in a distant foreign land, becoming in a way a stranger to his father. Therefore, he tied the mother church of these, signified not without mystery by the donkey, to the shoots or branches of the vine, to which she herself, by joining herself, said: And you, branches, abiding in me: For he entrusted and subjected the church to the apostles and their successors, so much so that it is bound by their institutions and judgments, And because an idolatrous bride, and one defiled by other impurities, ought not to be joined to Christ, a most pure and holy man,

--- Page 736 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 298**

The same is confirmed by other prophecies. Chapter II.

[Decorative initial V] Seeing that other Prophets have foretold concerning this dominion and kingdom given to our Jesus, we will briefly touch upon some of the many: For David, speaking in his own person [Marginal note: Dauid] in the second psalm, says: The Lord said to me: You are my Son, this day I have begotten you: where in Hebrew it is היום ילדתיך (baiom ielidtica): by which word 'baiom' is understood eternity without any determined time, as the author of the book called, Eloquia [Marginal note: Au. &c.] pulchritudinis, rightly interprets. Therefore, it speaks of Him begotten from eternity, and born temporally according to the flesh: Ask of me, and I will give you the nations for your inheritance, and the ends of the earth for your possession: Ask, that is, by performing the work which I have established, so that you may have legitimate dominion over all the ends of the earth: Which He had, and has, although the Mahometan schism was permitted by divine dispensation, not without order and mystery: concerning which there would be a great discourse, but I will only adduce what Paul, conscious of God's secrets, writes prophetically to the Thessalonians: [Marginal note: Paulus] Let no one terrify you, or seduce you by word or by letter, as if the day of the Lord were at hand: for it will not come, that is, showing the authority of His empire on the seat of His majesty, unless the dissension comes first: which truly and greatly happened through Mahomet: and also the man of sin, the son of perdition, will have been revealed, who will oppose and exalt himself above all that is called God: whence he will be called antichrist, and antideus, that is, against Christ and God: But the Lord Jesus will kill him with the spirit of His mouth, and will restore those things which have been torn apart by the Mahometan beast. Then He will rule all things with a rod of iron, that is, with insurmountable and utterly invincible power: and like a potter's vessel He will break them, namely the beast with its sect, and the son of iniquity with his father the devil, who has the empire of death: then indeed, death, the enemy, will be destroyed. Also in another psalm the same prophet says: He shall cry to me, You are my Father, and my strength, [Marginal note: Dauid] or my rock, or the refuge of my salvation, And I will make him my firstborn, high above the kings of the earth, so that he may deservedly be called (as John says) King of kings, [Marginal note: Ioan.] and Lord of lords, and Prince of the kings of the earth, and those things which follow, as we have declared above. Isaiah also says: And the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Angel of Counsel, or Wonderful Counselor, God the Mighty, Father of the world to come, which all the just await as a true kingdom, in which we ought to reign in perfect peace: Therefore he adds, that he shall be called Prince of Peace: And a little further down: His empire shall be multiplied, and of his peace there shall be no end: He shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, that is, to confirm it and strengthen it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth and forever. From which those smatterers among the Hebrews, or those blinded by obstinacy, are to be ridiculed, who say that that prophecy was fulfilled in Hezekiah, since neither Hezekiah's nor David's kingdom, nor family according to the flesh, endures; indeed, that royal lineage was long ago utterly extinguished, [Marginal note: Ioseph. Eusebi.] as Josephus and Eusebius narrate, with only the poor family of Christ remaining—

PP ij

--- Page 737 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

The royal line, which was already excluded from royal pomp, because it aspired to another kingdom, in which the oracle would be verified. Christ therefore, changing the Davidic kingdom for the better, now enjoys firm and perpetual peace. And so that all ambiguity may be removed, that the prophecy speaks only of the Messiah, and of God-man, it adds: And he shall be called אל גבור El gibor, that is, God the strong: Which cannot be said except of God, and of the Messiah, God and man. Nor let the Hebrews cavil, saying that El sometimes signifies strong, because it would be too incongruous a phrase if it were said: Strong [Jeremiah] Strong, since Gibor signifies nothing other than strong and robust. Jeremiah also openly proclaims this matter, saying: Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord, [Chaldaic Targum of Jonathan] and I will raise up to David a righteous branch, for which the Chaldaic Targum of Jonathan ben Uzziel (Ionatha ben ahoziel) says ואקים לדוד משיחא וצדיקא uaachim ledauid meſſiah dezidcha, Which translated word for word says: And I will raise up to David a righteous Messiah, that is, I will raise up in the family or house of David a righteous Messiah. And a king shall reign, and he shall be wise, and he shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. Nor let the Hebrews rave, saying that this was spoken of Josiah or Hezekiah: because in neither of them can that which follows be fulfilled: In those days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell confidently. And this is the name by which they shall call him יהוה צדקנו Adonai zidchenu, that is, our righteous Tetragrammaton, or (as Symmachus interprets) [Symmachus] Adonai our justifier. For neither in the time of those kings was Judah saved, nor did Israel dwell with confidence, neither according to a temporal kingdom, nor according to spiritual worship, or an eternal kingdom, as it was and is in the Messiah, by whose reign the church and Christian worship were established, which will never cease as long as the world endures: By whose working also the kingdom was prepared, and distributed day by day, which had been prepared from the foundation of the world, but granted to no one, since all were born rebels and children of wrath: But Christ, reconciling us, made us capable possessors of that kingdom. And what is finally added concerning the name by which he shall be called, can less apply to those kings, or to any mere man: because no man ought to be called by that great four-lettered name, [Moses the Egyptian] as Moses the Egyptian says in the book concerning direction: Whence the wiser Hebrews spontaneously confess that the oracle spoke of the Messiah, as is held in a certain magisterial gloss on Genesis, and elsewhere by many. David [David] again, seized by the Holy Spirit, sings: The Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies your footstool. And concerning whom the prophet speaks, Christ himself explains, when he asks the Pharisees, of whom the prophet speaks, of himself or of another? He would certainly not call himself his own Lord. Since therefore he speaks of another, whom did the king, existing over all the chosen people, call his Lord? Certainly not one of his subjects, nor any foreigner, or Gentile: Therefore, he speaks only of the Messiah, whom [Paul] he had seen in spirit as his Lord, and Lord of all things, as Paul explains to the Ephesians in a most opportune discourse, saying: God the Father raised Christ from the dead, establishing him at his right hand in the heavens above every principality,

--- Page 738 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 299**

power, might, and dominion, and every name that is named not only in this age, but also in the future: and He subjected all things under His feet: and He gave Him as head over all the church, which is His body: And again with the Hebrews: To which of the angels did He ever say, "Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies your footstool"? [Marginal note: Paul.] For all are ministering spirits, therefore not lords: therefore neither are enemies to be placed under their feet as a footstool: nor do they sit at the right hand of God. It remains therefore, that the prophet speaks of Him who rules in the heavens, and dominates over all the kings of the earth.

**Why Christ is not said to reign in the house of Abraham, although the promise concerning Him was first made to Abraham himself. Chapter III.**

[Large decorated initial A] braham, beyond all doubt, was called the father of the chosen family, the father of faith, existing as the head, as we are taught in the Gospel, to whose bosom all the elect flowed: nevertheless the heavenly oracle, when it announced the conception of the Redeemer, did not say, "He will reign in the house of Abraham," but "He will reign in the house of Jacob": Which I believe was because it was said to Abraham: "Cast out the handmaid and her son": In this, Abraham bears the image of a great and universal father, who has good and bad sons, just and unjust, upon whom He rains and causes His sun to rise: Therefore, not without mystery, from Abram he was called Abraham, that is, Father of many and mixed nations: Who also, in his offspring and progeny, holds the image of that father: For he had Isaac from a legitimate marriage, and Ishmael from an illegitimate one. But, alas, where am I venturing? What will be the legitimate and illegitimate marriage of the paternal and divine mind, so that Abraham there can hold its image? Indeed, there was a legitimate marriage for the Father, when from eternity that divine eye beheld His own essence as His proper wife, or (as they say) His proper object, and the seeing intellect and the seen essence became two not in one flesh, but in one most fruitful mind: which is also called the Father, generating His beloved Son, deservedly named Isaac, that is, laughter and delight, of the Father, namely. "This is (said that paternal voice) My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased": And this is the legitimate son, who, naturally begotten, endowed with all dignity and every privilege, was constituted heir of all things, through whom He also made the ages. But who Ishmael, born of an illegitimate marriage, might have been, it is impious at first glance even to consider this, that the Eternal Father had a son from a marriage other than a legitimate one: Yet the discourse does not offend prudent ears, although pious ones may fear to hear it. Let it be said, I ask, how angelic minds and all other things outside God were produced by the common parent of all: Not indeed from the legitimate and natural union of that paternal mind with the divine essence, because from that only His only-begotten Son proceeded, but undoubtedly from another, that is, by a complacent intuition He produced the ideas of all things in His mind, to the limits of which exemplars He fashioned all external things: Which knowledge of ideas, and production of things, spurious in a way—
**PP iij**

--- Page 739 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

...can be called effected by a certain denomination with respect to natural intuition, from which the legitimate son was born. Therefore, by the first spurious production, that one was born, concerning whom the Lord says in Job: "He is the beginning of the ways of God." And this one is the prince of rebels, as all wise men agree, and he who wished to oppress the legitimate son, Who, if compared to Christ, is not the beginning of the ways of God: because Christ was not produced as to his divinity in the ways of creatures: Nor is he (says **Paul**) of this creation, but from the beginning, and before the ages, the Son was begotten by way of **nature**, as our Theologians say. But all other things [were produced] not from a natural, but from a voluntary and complacent union. However, this firstborn from spurious production saw the legitimate son, with assumed humanity, who would be the heir of all things; whom the Eternal Father proposed to be adored by all angels, according to that [passage] of **Paul**: "And when he brings the firstborn into the world, he says: 'And let all his angels worship him.'" Therefore, touched by envy and puffed up by pride, that wicked one began to persecute him, whence from a most worthy creature, he was made a most hideous dragon. And the dragon stood (says **John**), who is the devil, to devour the son of the woman clothed with the sun, and crowned with twelve stars: But the son was taken up, and it was said in heaven: "Cast out the handmaid and her son," that is, the delight had in producing that most noble creature along with the son himself who was produced: And that great dragon, who is the devil, was cast out. Some will perhaps be struck with incredible wonder, asking: "How was he born from an external delight and from God, who became the devil, and by what means also were he and the delight, which was about producing and preserving him, cast out, since in God there is neither external delight, nor is anything cast out as reprobate from the supreme good?" To whom we can sufficiently answer, declaring that if God, being most good, is happy without any external good, and needing none of our goods, indeed, bestowing all those things upon us, **Solomon** nevertheless, bearing his person, sings in Proverbs: "And my delights are with the sons of men." And if he delights in human minds, it is fitting that he also delights in higher, or angelic, [beings]. He also delights in each of the creatures he produced, as he had said a little earlier: "And I delighted day by day," that is, in every form appearing in my creatures, whatever it may be: For this is proper to any artist, to delight, namely, in the works of his hands, in which he perceives and beholds an image or likeness of himself, which nature itself brings a wonderful delight to the artist. Nor is there to me a more elegant reason why God loves creatures so much, unless because he perceives something of his own in the work, and beholds his image, or a trace. Nor is the delight proceeding from an external work, but it flows from the craftsman himself along with the idea and form of things, which all are drawn from the supernal exemplar: Which delight, when it passes into creatures, deservedly obtains the name of handmaid. Therefore, he drives her from his royal house with her son, when someone, having become impure or rebellious, is found unworthy of such a banquet and kingdom. Therefore, that wicked and rebellious one was first expelled from that kingdom with his followers—

--- Page 740 ---
**TONE SEVEN. 300**

—bus: because he wanted to become heir, and oppress the legitimate son: This illegitimate one, that is, born from complacent delight, stood in the paternal kingdom as long as he respected the legitimate son: But as soon as he rose up against him, he was cast out together with those adhering to him: And then the image of the Father was taken from him, and the delight consequent upon it: For from a most beautiful angel he became a horrid serpent, and from a domestic friend, a most atrocious enemy. Therefore, in this kingdom not yet pacified, the Eternal Father did not wish the Son, who is called the King of Peace, to reign, since it was necessary that first his enemies be made the footstool of his feet, as the heavenly oracle says: Therefore it was not said, "He shall reign in the house of Abraham."

Why he does not reign even in the house of Isaac, to whom the promise was made a second time. Chapter IIII.

[Large initial S] Econd father of the chosen family was Isaac, in whose house also Christ is not said to reign: because in it was he whom the Lord hated, as it says in Malachi: "I have loved Jacob, but Esau I have hated."
**Malachi.**
He was given into servitude to his younger brother, and supplanted by him, and stripped of his birthright, and became a servant as long as he unduly persecuted his brother: Which things, like all others, are described with great mystery as a figure of better things: For he also bears the image of the Creator, who begat man in two ways: first the animal man, whom he hates, then the spiritual man, whom he loves, as Paul says: "First that which is natural, then that which is spiritual."
**Paul**
Which Moses also indicates when he says: "God formed man from the dust, or ashes of the earth": and this refers to the animal man: and afterwards he inspired, or breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, which in Hebrew sounds like that better portion, from which man is called spiritual. And although one precedes the other, Esau and Jacob are nevertheless twins. And the progenitor commands that the elder serve the younger, when he says to the better man: "Your desire shall be under you."
**GOD**
And he hates the elder as long as he is rebellious to the brother to whom he ought to be subject. Nor does he admit him into friendship, nor does Christ reign in him, unless he submits himself to the younger by birth, as he says, differing with Pilate: "My kingdom is not of this world,"
**CHRIST,**
in which the animal man prevails, and Esau, who is also called Edom, that is, red and bloody: indeed, he openly confesses the enmities that exist between them, when he says: "If the world hates you, know that it hated me before you."
**The Same.**
Taught by him, the two more intimate disciples, James and John, assert this in agreement: "Whoever wishes to be a friend of this world will be made an enemy of God."
**James. John.**
And so that it may be clearly understood of whom the discourse is, Paul, after having discussed much about the animal and spiritual man, adds: "Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God," unless, of course, they are changed for the better, and into the nature of the spirit, as he continues, saying: "This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality."
**Paul.**
Nor is it devoid of mystery that the younger supplants and subjects the elder, as Paul says: "I chastise my body, and bring it into subjection."
**The Same.**
Therefore he takes away the birthright, namely the dignity of preeminence, and the worship of God, which pertains to the spiritual, not to the animal man. Rightly—

PP iiij

--- Page 741 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

also snatches away the utterance not without mystery: because he is blessed with a true blessing, who, being free for God, embraces his neighbor with due charity, as we have from our true progenitor saying to such pious and benevolent ones: Come, [Marginal note: CHRIST] blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you. This blessing he snatches away by the persuasion of his mother Rebecca, that is, the Church, which teaches to sanctify man, [Marginal note: Isaac] so that he may be capable of that great blessing, which Father Isaac mystically hints at, when he says: May God give you of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, abundance of corn, wine, and oil: and let peoples serve you, and tribes adore you: Be lord of your brethren, and let your mother's sons bow down before you: Cursed be he that curseth you, and blessed be he that blesseth you with blessings. Therefore, the first portion of this blessing is of the dew of heaven, indeed of that super-mundane dew designated by Hermon, which is called the anathema of sorrow. Dew is a distillation from heaven, denoting the sprinkling of divine grace, or of the Holy Spirit, or whatever good flows from that super-celestial homeland, where all sorrow and pain have been anathematized: And this is the first portion of the blessing, which is given to the true Israelite. He adds also concerning the fatness of the earth, not indeed all fatness, but of corn, wine, and oil. The true corn is that from which the living bread was made, which descended from [Marginal note: CHRIST] heaven. Wine is pressed from that vine which says: I am the true vine. Oil is that of which the divine Lyre-player sings: God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of gladness. And again: With my holy oil I have anointed him. All these things, since we have explained them elsewhere, we will pass over as declared. Let peoples serve you, and tribes adore you: because [Marginal note: Paul. Book of Wisdom.] to him who is truly blessed by God, all things serve, since all things belong to the just. Hence the Apostle says to those who walk rightly: All things are yours, but you are Christ's. And Solomon, or whoever was the author of the Book of Wisdom, after having brought forth many good things concerning the just, also adds this: They shall judge nations, and shall rule over peoples. Nor let anyone be disturbed, that the good in this life are often afflicted, and subjected, and do not rule: because neither did Jacob immediately obtain dominion and happiness after the blessing: but first he was a fugitive in Mesopotamia of Syria, took wives, begot sons, experienced the discord of his sons, sojourned with his whole family in Egypt, his posterity was under servitude, labored in mud and brick, crossed the sea, wandered through the desert, forded rivers, conquered nations, and finally possessed a kingdom: Which the wise man himself also touched upon, saying: Having been troubled in a few things, they shall be well disposed in many, because God tested them, and found them worthy of Himself. But not without wonder can what follows be read: "Be lord of your brethren," when he had only one brother, And since he again subjected peoples and tribes to him, why does he afterwards specifically subject brethren? The oracle (as I think) ascends higher than the face of the text shows: But we will reveal these wonders hidden in the law of the Lord, provided that the Lord himself deigns to enlighten our eyes: [Marginal note: John] John says that when he wanted to adore the Angel who was speaking with him, the Angel himself forbade him, saying: "See that you do not do it; I am your fellow servant, and of your brethren"

--- Page 742 ---
**VOLUME SEVEN.** **301**

who have the testimony of Jesus. Now he recognizes himself as a servant of those who have the testimony of Jesus, he who previously allowed himself to be adored: Whence, I ask, is this? Indeed, because he reigns in the house of Jacob, and he made us his co-heirs, of whom it is said: "And let all his angels adore him." Hence, after Christ, the blood [Marginal note: Paul] of animals is no longer shed to appease celestial powers and virtues: indeed, all have become ministering spirits (as Paul follows) sent for service: Who are also our [Marginal note: The same.] brothers, begotten of the same Parent God, and serve us: For this blessing, already received, the first-born animal man is vehemently saddened, and roars with a great cry, because he would not submit to the spirit, until, like a young horse, he becomes tame under a trainer: He complains and asks the Father that at least one part of the blessing be reserved until he too can prevail in something: Or, repenting, he desires to be blessed with his brother, so that he can reign together with him: He does not refuse his brother's dominion, nor does he ask for it to be revoked, what was granted to him (by God's command), but he himself desires to be blessed together. Whereupon the Father, who wishes to save both, moved by mercy, says: "In the dew of heaven and in the fatness of the earth shall be your blessing:" For if the animal man, even unwillingly, submits to the spirit, desiring to be blessed with it, he becomes a partaker of the blessing already granted to the younger son, which is in the dew of heaven and in the fatness of the earth: so that just as a fourfold spring is for irrigating primarily the spiritual man, so the dew, which by numbers is its surname, or sheath, is for irrigating the lower man, as the more secret Theologians say: But the fatness of the earth in grain, wine, and oil is for both: because heavenly bread and deifying wine are taken by both men: thus both are anointed with chrism and holy oil; just as both are bathed in heavenly dew, although (as we said) in comparison to other influences, it is said to be assigned to the lower man. Therefore, the sensible man is blessed, provided he is content to be reduced to the servitude of the spiritual man; although he may feel great repugnance, so that he mourns with a vehement cry: And then one family is formed, in which Christ reigns. Yet he is not said to reign in the house of Isaac, where Esau, who is also Edom, whom they interpret as red and bloody, wishes to preside: because he does not reign where flesh and blood prevail, which cannot partake of the kingdom of God, unless they are converted into the nature of the spirit and reduced to its servitude. But if Esau persists in rebellion, he becomes of the family of Ishmael, and his son; who was cast out of that kingdom, as he who was to reign said to some: [Marginal note: CHRIST,] "You are of your father the devil:" And again: "One of you is a devil." Therefore, the peaceful king ought not to reign in that family, in which there are still enemies and rebels, until all are placed as a footstool for his feet.

**Why it was said by angelic oracle, "Jesus shall reign in the house of Jacob forever." Chapter V.**

**F**rom the divine decree proclaimed by the angel, we have that Christ ought to reign in the house of Jacob, who bore the most express type of him: For both were fathers of a twelvefold family, the latter indeed if-
**PP v.**

--- Page 743 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

the one indeed figurative, but the other true: And both were princes of a divine and chosen family: For Jacob, when he wrestled with the angel, was called a prince, or heir, of God: for thus Israel is interpreted: And Christ, when he fought against the tyrant of the world, was deservedly called the prince of the kings of the earth (by the authority of [Marginal note: John] John): Each also gave his name to his family: For just as from Israel his descendants were called Israelites, so from Christ Christians: But not from Abraham were Abrahamites, nor from Isaac were Isaacites, those begotten by them, named. In many other things too they agree, as we shall explain by proceeding: But some obscene and absurd things seem to occur concerning this Jacob, which exceedingly disturb the mind at first glance, and seem entirely alien from the figuration of Christ: namely, that he supplanted his brother and took away his birthright: that he had two sisters as wives, and not content with their marriage, either to satisfy lust or for love of offspring, he also had intercourse with their handmaids: Who, I ask, would believe that such a man prefigured the sacraments of Christ and represented Christ himself, unless another meaning is sought than what the killing letter provides? For whatever was done concerning this man pertains to the highest sacraments: He supplanted the elder-born, and snatched the blessing from him who represents flesh and blood, as a true spiritual man ought to do. He is sent by his father into Mesopotamia, that is, to an [Marginal note: Paul] elevated calling, concerning which it was said: "He has called us to heavenly kingdoms": To him was given the precept: "Take for yourself a wife from there," that is, a genuine life or work, to which he might be dedicated: who should be from the daughters of Laban, that is, of superior whiteness, of which he bore the type, or of clear light, which he who is black and enveloped in darkness needs: When a man begins to undertake this journey, he is preceded by many blessings from the father: And sometimes, while tending towards his goal, he falls asleep in that sleep of which it is said: "In peace, in the same [place], I will sleep and rest." And then he sees the ladder of virtues, or steps, by which we ascend to God: concerning which the prophet [Marginal note: David] again says: "He has set ascents in his heart in the valley of tears, in the place which he has appointed." Concerning which place it is said that its foot was on the earth, that is, in our heart made from earth: which ought to be a certain valley of tears, since for us, while [Marginal note: CHRIST] we inhabit the earth, there must be weeping, according to the edict of the highest Emperor, so that we may be comforted in our homeland. But the top of the ladder ought to touch heaven, because there both the mind, and the eye, and the whole progress ought to be fixed: Through this, angels are seen ascending, carrying our prayers and works to God, and descending to us, carrying graces and heavenly illuminations. Many other mysteries are recounted, which are most delightful to our leader Christ and his family journeying to God: Having omitted these for the time being, we will unravel who these four women are, whose companionship Jacob had, although he served for only one. Here therefore it must be noted that two of these women are wives, while the rest are handmaids and concubines. But those two sisters, whom the spiritual man figured by Jacob, in whose house Christ reigns, takes as wives, are two vi-

--- Page 744 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 302

lives, namely the active and the contemplative: to which he applies and joins two portions, the higher and the lower: For no one is of Christ's family unless he exercises himself in the active life with Martha, or the contemplative life with Mary, or in both with the Apostles. The active life is therefore figured in Leah, who is called laborious, and has bleary eyes, and eyes hindered from clear vision, indicating that the mind occupied with external works is troubled by many things, so that it cannot perfectly devote itself and apply its inner eye to divine matters: The contemplative life, however, is in Rachel, who is interpreted as 'seeing the beginning,' and is most beautiful: because the eye of the mind, and that supreme portion devoted to contemplation, gazes upon God, the beginning of all things: who, since He is most beautiful, it is necessary that the eye contemplating Him be beautiful, as Plotinus says: "Let him become beautiful and God-like, if he is to behold divine beauty." [Marginal note: Plotinus] But let the order (I ask) of this matter be observed: Jacob sighs for Rachel and serves for her, and yet is first joined to Leah, because the spiritual man sighs for the quiet and vision that is in contemplation: for which he undertook the yoke of God's service: nevertheless, it is necessary that he first be joined to Leah and the active life, before he arrives at contemplative perfection: Therefore, those ancient fathers decreed that no one should be admitted to the solitary and contemplative life unless they had been exercised for eighteen or twenty years in works of charity and the services of the monastery: For this is the custom of the homeland and of the family devoted to God, that a person, purged through works of penance and laborious efforts, may ascend to the sweet contemplation of divine things: for which he serves for repeated seven-year periods, by which a man, doubly purified and initiated into God, may be able to call [upon Him]: For the number seven is critical, purgative, and remissive. Critical indeed, because in it changes and renewals commonly occur: For an infant, whether it will live, is discerned in the seventh hour: and after seven days it casts off the remnants of the umbilical cord: and after twice seven [days] its sight begins to move towards the light: and after seven times seven [days] it freely turns its pupils and whole face towards individual fears concerning what is to be seen: But after seven months, teeth begin to emerge from the jaws: and after twice seven [months] it sits without fear of falling: After thrice seven [months] its sound breaks forth into words: After four times seven [months] it not only stands firmly, but walks: After five times seven [months] it begins to dislike its nurse's milk: In the seventh year, teeth are changed to more suitable ones, and in the same year the perfection of speech is fully achieved: and having completed the second seven-year period, it reaches puberty and begins to be moved by the power of generation: In the third [seven-year period] it shows blossoms and down [facial hair]: In the fourth [seven-year period] the growth of stature is defined: In the fifth [seven-year period] youthful perfection is completed: In the sixth [seven-year period] the previously gathered strengths are preserved: In the seventh [seven-year period] it perfects its age, so that it is fit for counsel. But when it has reached seven decades, where the number seven is brought to its full measure by a complete number [ten], [Marginal note: David] then it has the common limit of living, as the prophet says: "The days of our years are seventy years." And through this number seven, authors of medicine determine that many alterations occur in fevers. [Marginal note: Auth. m. 7] We have briefly touched upon these things, so that it may be understood that the service of twice seven [years] is not described without reason—

--- Page 745 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

a path made by man, who wishes to devote himself to God and to contemplation: To which if he wishes to arrive, it is necessary that he be twice changed and transformed from clarity to clarity, so that he may fix the eye of his mind without offense to it on those eternal spectacles. And by the same number is indicated the purification to be performed, when he has been purified: Therefore Elisha, not ignorant of this mystery, commanded that Naaman be washed seven times in the Jordan. And in the law it is holy that a cleansed leper be sprinkled seven times in the blood of a sparrow. And because expiation occurs in the septenary, remission also follows the same number, as we are taught in a long series in Leviticus, that is, that in the seventh year debts would be remitted, and fields would rest, no exaction being made from them through cultivation. In the seventh square, however, there was a full remission of debts, of servants, and of all things that had been alienated. Hence Peter, when he spoke of remission, proposed the septenary number, saying: "Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Up to seven times?" From which number Christ, responding, did not wish to depart, but said: "I do not say to you up to seven times, but up to seventy times seven," bringing the septenary to completion by means of the denary number. And for his prudence the steward of iniquity is praised, who not without mystery reduced one hundred to fifty: so that from this he might more easily obtain remission, as Jerome discusses to Galasius, and Theophilus with him. Finally, the Redeemer observed this number in the mission of the Holy Spirit, who came after the same square, just as in the law a full remission was given in the fiftieth year itself. Therefore, Jacob, rightly laboring with this number, purified, obtained remission, and twice changed for the better, came to his Rachel, who prefigures contemplation.

But let us return to the two wives, each of whom has her handmaid. Therefore, the legitimate wives are the active life and the contemplative life, in which two powers of Jacob delight, namely intellect and will: or (as academics teach) that superior portion of the intellect, which some call synderesis, and the rational and discursive portion, of which the latter serves the active life, and the former the contemplative. But it is a wondrous mystery, how each of them offers her handmaid. Indeed, that superior and contemplative portion has a handmaid, by whom contemplating these created and lower things, it may be delighted: through which visible things it may ascend to the invisible creator: And this is the discursive reason annexed to the senses, through which it perceives sensible things: and our Jacob is joined to it, when through these lower things observed he hunts for the magnitude of the creator: But he is joined to Rachel, when he beholds and contemplates the very principle of things, and the fount of all good things, in the light emanating from Him, with the eye of the mind. The inferior portion also has, or the will, or the operative virtue, its handmaid, namely delight in things to be done: to which delight, or co-delighting virtue, if Jacob is joined, and the spiritual man directing all things to God, she herself also bears good fruits worthy of eternal life: He is joined to Leah, when he acts immediately for God. But let us also observe the names of the handmaids, if they are fitting: Rachel's handmaid is Bilhah, who is said to be "absorbed" or "grown old"—

[Marginal notes:]
Eliseus
Leuitic.
Petrus
CHRI STVS.
Hieron. Theop.
Academ.

--- Page 746 ---
TONE SEVEN. 303

...called 'absorbed' or 'grown old': For a person contemplating these things, which are wonderfully produced, is absorbed by their magnitude into the contemplation of the Creator, towards whom, sighing, life seems long and tedious to him, so that he cries out with the prophet: "Woe is me, that my sojourning is prolonged!" And it seems to him to grow too old in these lower things, so that this consideration is appropriately called 'grown old'. The other handmaid is Zilpah, which is interpreted as "gaping mouth", that is, insatiable desire, which indeed arises in dealing with these things: And this is also good, provided that it is subject to Jacob, that is, to the spiritual man. In this house, therefore, which is entirely dedicated to God, and from which the whole church is gathered, our Christ reigns forever. And let these things be said, as far as they pertain to the moral sense.

On the fruits of this house, in which Christ reigns. Chapter VI.

**B**ut let us see what fruits Jacob received from these wives and handmaids. First, it is not without mystery that he had more (children) from Leah than from Rachel, because we expect more from the active life than from the contemplative, and more timely ones, although more lovable ones from the contemplative. Hence, granted that Mary's choice is commended by the Savior as the best, Martha's solicitude is nevertheless not blamed, although it is laborious and experiences many troubles. The best part is also that which presupposes the merit of the active life, and strives to ascend higher: Therefore, Rachel's first son is called Joseph, that is, an increase to all things acquired in the previous life. Hence it is also declared why the latest fruits are from Rachel: because, namely, all the fruits of the active life, through which we are disposed to the contemplative life, are presupposed. This also must not be omitted, that Jacob does not commit adultery with the handmaids, nor do the wives take it ill; indeed, they spontaneously offer the handmaids: because even if a person delights in contemplating and dealing with created things, provided he directs everything to God, he does not sin, but rather merits: Nor does either portion (wife), which seeks God immediately, take it ill, but they spontaneously offer to the husband even the delight in created things, provided they themselves receive the offspring conceived from the handmaids: therefore Rachel said: "I have my handmaid Bilhah; go in to her, that she may bear upon my knees, and I may have sons from her." [Marginal note: Rachel] Which her sister, being jealous, likewise did. But coming to the particular sons, let us begin from the birth from which the spiritual man begins: because fruit is produced much more easily through the active life than through the contemplative life. From her, therefore, are generated first Reuben, then Simeon, Levi, and Judah. Reuben, who is interpreted as "seeing through the middle", signifies holy intention: which directs all things on a straight path to God, so that it does not deviate to the right or to the left. And this intention ought to be the firstborn, [Marginal note: CHRIST] if we desire to produce sons and fruits worthy of eternal life: which the Savior admonishes with a clear voice, saying: "If your eye is simple, your whole body will be luminous," having no part of darkness, but like a lamp of splendor it will illuminate you, looking through the true middle, namely, into

--- Page 747 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

the object towards which we strive: For this eye (as all agree) signifies intention: after intention in doing things and observing precepts, obedience to the one commanding follows, so that all things may be accomplished at his nod. Hence, secondly, Simeon is begotten, who is interpreted as 'hearing' and 'obedient'. Levi follows, who is called 'applied,' 'added,' or 'attached': because, having a right intention with readiness to obey, it remains for him to apply his hands to the work. And because in all things we do, we ought to praise God by invoking His name, therefore after these, Judah is born, who is called 'praise' or 'confession' by our people: But the contemplative life, or that higher portion, envied the swift and fruitful offspring of her sister with most holy zeal: And since she did not feel herself so perfect as to be able to bear children, because not yet expiated, she could not fix her eye on God, she offers her handmaid, that is, the contemplation of creatures, through which one comes from the creature of the world to the invisible, and to God: Who conceives and bears Dan, that is, the estimative judgment of the greatness of divine things from these created things which she contemplates: or the judgment by which she most subtly condemns and expiates herself, so that she may be able to strive directly towards God: After whom, Naphtali is immediately conceived and born, who is called 'enlargement of the heart': because from the greatness of created things contemplated by a purified mind, the heart is enlarged, so that it may be able to run towards God: Her sister, emulating this, also offers her handmaid, namely, delight in handling things, which, like a spur and a certain goad, makes our mind eager to accumulate merits. Hence, afterwards, Gad is well produced, who is called 'girt,' namely, for prey and the accumulation of merits, enriched by which merits, and content, she considers herself blessed in a certain way: whence Asher afterwards is born: who signifies 'blessedness': Therefore, joyful and pleasant, she is still animated to offspring, which twin offspring Issachar and Zebulun she again receives: Of whom one is interpreted as 'remembering the Lord', the other 'dwelling of strength': and this indicates that the perfect active life, enriched with merits and with the work completed, arranges the house of the mind with the most beautiful adornment, so that it may be able to receive the heavenly guest, of whom, always mindful, it may be free for God Himself through contemplation. Our Jacob, therefore, resting after the works received from Leah, which pertain to the active life itself and to the contemplative preliminaries, it remains for him to attend only to Rachel and to perfect contemplation: from whom he first begets Joseph, who is called 'increase,' namely, for all the works and merits which he received from Leah and from both handmaids. Therefore (if I am not mistaken) this is the best part, not only because it is more secure and more pleasant, but because it presupposes every merit of the active life and seeks increase: Therefore he loves this offspring more than the others, because he is augmented by all, and because he begot him in optimal rest. Nor is it devoid of mystery that Rachel was prepared for this offspring by mandrakes: which Leah's firstborn, Reuben, had offered to her, whom we declared above to signify intention: for the same intention which was prior in the fruits of the active life, the same also in the progress and fructification of the contemplative-

--- Page 748 ---
SEVENTH TONE. 304

...tion is sought, so that on both sides, through a straight and middle line, one may look into the same thing. With this intention well established, he comes to the offspring of the contemplative life, namely Joseph and Benjamin, in whose tribes and families alone, not without mystery, were the houses of God: For the first was in Shiloh, which is in the tribe of Joseph; the other, most famous of all, was built in Jerusalem, which is in the tribe of Benjamin, by which conception and birth a more celebrated one is not expected. Therefore, once the first son, heavenly contemplation and taste, has been obtained and added to all merits already acquired, another is also generated, who was Benjamin, and is interpreted as 'son of the right hand,' signifying no other than Him who sits at the right hand of God, Jesus Christ our Redeemer: whom all perfect ones ought to generate in mind and in their innermost being; after whom, as the last offspring, they should cease to give birth. This also must be noted, that in his birth Rachel dies, that is, that superior and divine portion communicated to us, because, already united with Christ himself generated in the mind, our spiritual man, yielding to Him along with Paul, ought to say: 'I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.' [Marginal note: Paul] For to Him, the most full and perfect, that portion which is in part yields, and dies, so that it may live in the whole. Therefore, Rachel having died in the birth of this Benjamin, she is buried in Ephrath, between Jerusalem and Bethlehem, that is, in abundance and heavenly riches, for thus Ephrath is interpreted: Which is said to be placed not without mystery between Jerusalem, which is the 'vision of peace,' and Bethlehem, which signifies the 'house of bread': For he who dies to the world and to the animal man, or he who dies by the death of a kiss, which occurs in an ecstasy of the mind (as we have explained elsewhere), is buried in the most abundant riches, which are given to all who call upon Him, and are placed between the vision of true and supernal peace, and that bread of life, which he who eats lives forever: For then he has the beginning of the beatific vision and eternal life; to which the true Jacob and true Israelite desires to ascend, who conceives and brings forth those twelve fruits explained and described by John in his most sacred revelation, where he says: 'In the midst of its street,' that is, in the heart of the true Israelite, 'and on either side of the river,' that is, from both portions, 'is the tree of life,' namely Christ, or His spirit or grace, vivifying us and making us fruitful with twelve fruits produced each month, that is, through individual monthly and lunar revolutions, which are contained under one solar revolution. [Marginal note: John:] Here very great mysteries would occur to be explained, why, namely, the sun and the other planets in their full and proper circuit run through the twelve signs, sown (as the Hebrew Theologians say) by the twelve revolutions of the great name of God, in whose power all things are made: [Marginal note: Heb. Th.] And why the Moon revolves twelve times through that duodenary in the space of time in which the Sun traverses once: And what the Sun and what the Moon signify in us: For Plato in the Symposium names the superior and divine portion in us the sun, but the inferior discourse the moon: [Marginal note: Plato.] And both produce; but the inferior by the power of the superior, sown by divine power; and discursive reason revolves more often than the superior, which is more fixed and always direct, like the sun in the divine

--- Page 749 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

always aims. And just as each luminary traverses the duodenary circuit by influencing and producing, so the Sun and Moon in the human world are said to bear fruit through this duodenary, as if through a primarily increasing number. Hence [Marginal note: Paulus] also Paul enumerates the fruits of the spirit and virtues, which are produced in the performance of deeds, as twelve, saying: "But the fruit of the Spirit is charity, joy, peace, and the others which follow," according to the number of signs and principal joints in the human body, and of the tribes of the Israelite house, in which Christ reigns, and for whose lost sheep the Redeemer came into the world to redeem. [Marginal note: Orige.] Which things (as Origen says) are not to be understood according to the flesh, just as the Ebionites, completely mistaken (as they say), understood, who are in fact and name most poor, but according to the spirit, either in a moral sense, of which we have spoken, or in an allegorical sense, as we shall now explain more broadly.

What this house is according to allegory. Chapter VII.

[Large initial S] But if from a moral sense...

--- Page 750 ---
TONE SEVEN. 305

Yet the most just Prince, indeed the fount of all righteousness, disposes all things in order: he could indeed give paradise without merits, nevertheless he decreed to reward soldiers according to the excellent deeds of each: Likewise, he could remit the injury inflicted upon him by enemies and deserters without any penance, yet he commanded that everyone sinning should be subject to the law of penance, according to the gravity of the offense: He could also, with a mere nod, bestow empire upon his son, and dominion over the universe: yet he did not do this, but rather ordained that he should acquire dominion for himself by hereditary and martial right, and possess it most peacefully after the enemies were vanquished and put to flight: since he is the firstborn of him who created all things: Hence the magnanimous Emperor challenged the most monstrous tyrant of the human race and prince of the world to single combat, whom he also vanquished with fortunate outcome in combat: and with blood flowing from his own noble wounds, he washed away all human defilement, and restored to their pristine liberty those unjustly oppressed by the worst tyrant, and by this supreme generosity bound the human race to himself: Hence it is said: It was necessary for Christ to suffer, [Marginal note: CHRIST] namely for freeing captives, and thus to enter into his glory: Of which glory, dominion and sovereignty over all things is a part. By a similar path, he also led his chosen princes, whom he sent into the whole world to preach the gospel to every creature, and to each he assigned a part of the worldly family, so that by preaching and teaching them, and even expending blood in testimony of doctrine, he might deservedly preside over the tribe or family or nation which he acquired, as sons, and in a certain way redeemed (yet by the power of the supreme redeemer). And these are the true twelve tribes, over which the Emperor and Redeemer promised the Apostles presidency and judgment of the universe: Of which tribes, those twelve Israelite ones were a small image and figure: and both families were distributed by the number twelve: The Apostolic, so that it might pursue in due order the twelve parts of the world corresponding to the twelve signs: That Israelite one, indeed, so that it might prefigure the twelve-fold family of the church with the same number. And both were most excellently divided by that primary growing number twelve, just as all growing things (as we touched upon above) are numbered. For that typical nation grew immensely in a very short time, so much so that it first filled Egypt, then that promised land, which bore the likeness of the holy church: And the twelve tribes, taught and acquired by the Apostles, grew so that in a short time they filled the whole world with believers. Thus, both families were and are augmented, so as to equal the spaces of that immense land about which the prophet sings: "I believe that I shall see the good things of the Lord in the land of the living." [Marginal note: David] To which entry is made through twelve gates guarded by twelve angels: which is built upon twelve foundations: just as the visible heaven itself is divided into twelve signs full of innumerable stars, just as in each twelve-fold family there were innumerable elect beyond the twelve thousand sealed.

[Decorative flourish]

--- Page 751 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND
Chapter VIII.
How great a harmony those Apostolic tribes may have been distributed according to the division of the figurative family and the signs of the star-bearing heaven.

[Illuminated initial I containing a small landscape scene] That mystery of sacred things must also be observed, that the number twelve is born from four trigons, or from three quaternions, and is divided as a solid into four angles: which is found to be observed in both this family and the heaven of stars. For the beloved Apostle of Christ, speaking of that heavenly division and the true dwelling of the chosen tribes, says: "From the east, three gates; from the west, three gates; from the north, three gates." In imitation of which, the temple was made, through any three gates of which three tribes were accustomed to enter, as we find in the records of the Hebrews. In this same order and sacred arrangement, the children of Israel encamped, by the Lord's command: to the east, three tribes; to the south, three tribes; to the west, three tribes; and to the north, three tribes. This heavenly family follows the order of the heavens, concerning which Astronomers say that to the east are assigned three signs or images; to the south, three images; to the west, three images; and to the north, three images. Moreover, in the regions subject to the first three images, and the eastern ones, three Apostles preached: Simon, Bartholomew, and Matthew. And in the regions directed by the three southern figures, three other Apostles preached: Thaddeus, Andrew, and Thomas. But in the regions of the three western images, James the Less, John, and Philip preached. Indeed, the regions directed by the northern images were entrusted to James the Greater, Peter, and Matthias. These things could suffice for describing their agreement, by being silent (as Plato commands) about particulars; nevertheless, inasmuch as the Lord has enlightened our eyes, we shall attempt to run through certain particulars. If we shall have accomplished these things with full harmony, let glory be rendered to the supreme harmonizer; but if we shall have said less, let the readers please excuse our weakness, which is not even troubled if the supreme Lord has hidden some things from his unworthy servants, which he reserves to be communicated to his chosen friends. Therefore, relying on the grace of Him from whom comes every good, we shall also undertake explaining the agreement of certain particulars, under which prince each tribe truly serves, and through which gate, with Him as leader, it can enter the heavenly kingdom, which it hopes to obtain through continuous and faithful service. And so that we may do this, it must first be seen with what aspect, and in what region of the sky each typical tribe, and with what mystery, it has encamped. Afterwards, we deem it necessary to see into which trigons the heaven is distributed, and to which trigon, or to which sign, each region is dedicated. Finally, in what region each of the Apostles preached.

--- Page 752 ---
**SEVENTH TONE.** 306

**By what distribution, and with what mystery, the individual figurative tribes pitched their camps according to the aspects of the heavens. Chapter IX.**

And lest anyone should think that the distributions of regions according to the aspects of the heavens (as astronomers teach) are superstitious and vain, Holy Scripture asserts that God, whose works are all arranged in wisdom, commanded those tribes of the most chosen Israelite family to encamp around the tabernacle of the covenant according to the celestial aspects, in groups of three and three, as we read in the book of Numbers: [Marginal note: Astron:] [Marginal note: Nume:] For he commanded Moses and Aaron that each one, by his companies, with their standards and banners, and the houses of their kindred, should encamp in a circle around the tabernacle of the covenant. Where Origen [says]: [Marginal note: Orige.] Here we say a form is prescribed, how the people of God, going forth from Egypt to the true land of promise and the glory of the kingdom of heaven, may be led by certain orders and degrees of merit, by a certain wondrous sacrament and sacred order. For it is said that to the east Judah shall pitch his tents by the companies of his army: the prince Nahason son of Aminadab: the number of fighters seventy-four thousand six hundred. Near him the tribe of Issachar: the prince Natanaël son of Suar: the number of fighters fifty-four thousand four hundred. Then the tribe of Zebulun: the prince Eliab son of Helon: the numbered soldiers fifty-seven thousand and four hundred: and the entire multitude of this three-ranked army fighting under Judah was one hundred eighty-six thousand and four hundred.

The standard of the camp of Reuben towards the south: the prince Elizar son of Sedeu: the count of fighters forty-six thousand and five hundred: and those of the tribe of Simeon encamped next to him: the prince Salamiel son of Zuri Sadai: the total of fighters forty-nine thousand three hundred. Afterwards the tribe of Gad: the prince Eliaza son of Rebaël: the numbered soldiers forty-five thousand six hundred fifty: but the total of all fighting under the three-ranked division of Reuben was one hundred fifty-one thousand four hundred and fifty, who set out in the second place: But the tabernacle of testimony was carried by the Levites, who were in the midst of the camps.

The standard of the camp of Ephraim was raised towards the sea, or the west: the prince Elissamah son of Hamihud: fighters forty thousand five hundred: And next to him the tribe of Manasseh: the prince Gamaliel son of Pedahzur: the total of warriors thirty-two thousand two hundred. Afterwards the tribe of Benjamin: the prince Abidan son of Gideon: the number of fighters thirty-five thousand four hundred: The total of those fighting under Ephraim was one hundred eight thousand one hundred, and these set out in the third order.

The standard of the camp of Dan to the north: The prince Abihezer son of Hamisadai: Numbered soldiers sixty-two thousand and seven hundred: next to whom the tribe of Asher pitched its camp: the prince Paghiel son of Hocra: The number of fighters forty-one thousand five hundred. After which the tribe of Naphtali: the prince Abirab son of Henan: The soldiers were fifty-three thousand and four hundred: the total of all fighting under Dan was one hundred fifty-seven
QQ ij

--- Page 753 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

six hundred. But the sum of all the tribes was 603,550: six hundred three thousand five
hundred fifty: as many radical letters (as is asserted) are in the whole Pentateuch.
Nor were they therefore said to encamp according to the regions of the sky, because they were subject to the aspects and
influences of the stars, since in most places of sacred scripture they are declared
[Marginal note: Ptolem.] exempt, just as Ptolemy also confesses in *Fructus*, but rather that they might correspond to the supermundane heaven, from which we are all primarily directed, and to which we all ought to conform; in which there are also four regions of heaven, as we are taught by scripture:
[Marginal note: Isaias] The East, concerning which Isaiah says: "His name is the East," and again: "Calling a righteous man from the East." For from there comes the Messiah. The South, concerning which Habakkuk says: "God will come from the South." Nor do the prophets disagree, since He will come from both places, as is known to those who understand those denominations and the congruence of the lower world with the archetype. The West, for which the Hebrews commonly have the sea, indicates those supreme waters with which Christ came, as John says: "This is Jesus, who came by water and blood." For it should not be understood of elemental water, but of supercelestial and spiritual water. The North is the rectitude of justice, from which all evil is revealed and manifested; which is first discerned by the righteous judge, and afterwards punished. These supermundane aspects are prior to those which are thus denominated from the course of the sun; and these receive all their power and strength from those; according to whose aspects the tribes were commanded to encamp with great mystery, not only of that typical family, but of the true and militant family under Christ the prince, as we shall presently say.

Into how many trigons of the heaven they are distinguished, and to which trigon, or sign, each region is subject. Chapter X.

[Marginal note: Astron.]
[Large decorative initial E]
HERE is in this visible heaven (as all Astronomers agree) a fourfold trigon: The first of these is airy and oriental, inclining from the east to the north; its signs are Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius; and their Lords are Mercury, Venus, and Saturn. To Gemini with Mercury are subject Hyrcania, Armenia, Mantiana, Cyrenaica, Marmarica, and the lower region of Egypt. To Libra and Venus are subject Bactriana, Caspia, Syria, Thebais, Oaxis, and the Troglodytic region. But to Aquarius with Saturn are subject Sauromatica, Oxiana, Sogdiana, Arabia, Azania, Media, Ethiopia; and these regions for the most part belong to Inner Asia. The second trigon is earthy and southern, extending from the south to the east; its signs are Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn; its Lords are Venus, Mercury, and Saturn. To Taurus with Venus are subject the Cyclades, the Maritime regions of Asia Minor, Cyprus, Parthia, Media, and Persia. To Virgo with Mercury are subject Greece, Achaia, Crete, Babylon, Mesopotamia, Assyria, and Elam, whence the Elamites. But to Capricorn and Saturn are subject Macedonia, Thrace, Illyria, India, Ariana, Gordiana; of which regions many are in Asia Minor. The third trigon is watery and western, extending from the west to the south; its

--- Page 754 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 307**

its images are Pisces, Cancer, & Scorpio: its Lords Jupiter, Moon, & Mars.
To Pisces with Jupiter are subject Lycia, Lydia, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Paphlagonia,
Nazamonitis, & Garamantica. To Cancer truly & the Moon, Bithynia, Phrygia, Col-
chica, Numidia, Africa, Carthage, & all Carchedonia. To Scorpio moreover &
Mars, Syria, Commagene, Cappadocia, Metagonitis, Mauretania, & Getulia.
The last fiery northern trigon, turning from north to west: its
images are Aries, Leo, Sagittarius: its Lords Mars, Sun, & Jupiter: To Aries
& Mars, subject are Britain, the part of Gaul which is called Galatia by the Greeks:
Germany, Barsania, Hollow Syria, Idumea, & Judea: To Leo, & the Sun, Ita-
ly, Apulia, Sicily, Phoenicia, Chaldeans, Orseni, or Orcheni: To Sagittarius & Ju-
piter, Tuscany, Celtica, Hispania, & happy Arabia. These are the things which from Astronomers [Marginal note: Astron.]
especially from Ptolemy, easily the prince of astronomers, we can hold as certain: [Marginal note: Ptolm.]
And if there are any other regions, a subtle investigator can reconcile them with these principal ones.

In which provinces, & to which subject signs each Apostle preached. Chapter XL.

[Decorative initial E]ND indeed by the greatest providence (the Holy Spirit thus decreeing) it was
done, that to each Apostle was assigned some region directed by
one of the signs, so much so, that the twelve Apostles themselves pre-
ached in all twelve principal regions of the sky corresponding
with the twelve celestial images. For in the eastern trigon subject to Ge-
mini, Libra, & Aquarius, Simeon, Bartholomew, & Matthew preached: [Marginal note: Barthol. Matth.]
For Simeon had the lot of preaching in Egypt, which is assigned to Gemini:
Bartholomew in Bactriana, Lycaonia, & Armenia, regions subject to Libra:
Matthew in Ethiopia, which is of Aquarius. Nor do I say that any Apostle
preached in all regions, & cities subject to that sign to which it corre-
sponds, but in some of them: And this was sufficient for placing in the great house of God
twelve foundations corresponding to the twelve celestial images, &
the twelve presiding intelligences, & that full number of twelve sacraments: when-
ce in that supermundane edifice, or church of God, the name of each Apo-
stle is deservedly placed in the foundation, just as the name of each angel in the individual
gates, as we have from the celestial John, which in its place (with divine favor) we will [Marginal note: Ioan.]
explain more broadly. And sometimes one Apostle was the coadjutor of another: Paul [Marginal note: Paulus]
for he was the diligent coadjutor of all for all (as he says) the churches, & laboring
above all, he ran about everywhere. In particular, however, Simeon, after he had [Marginal note: Simeon]
traversed all Egypt, was finally, after the death of James, assumed to the episcopate of Jerusalem,
to supply what James, prevented by martyrdom, was unable to complete:
Matthew also went to the Macedonians, who belonged to Andrew's jurisdiction: [Marginal note: Matth.]
who also together with Simeon came to the Persians: & John fur- [Marginal note: Simeon]

QQ iij

--- Page 755 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

beyond the Ionians, he also traveled to Rome. In the second, southern triangle, assigned to Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, preached Andrew, Thaddeus, and
[Marginal note: Andreas] Thomas: For Andrew preached in Achaia and Greece, assigned to Virgo; then he crossed over to the Thracians and Byzantines, subject to Saturn and Capri-
[Marginal note: Math.] corn, as we have from Metaphrastes: Which regions are placed under Thomas’s dominion; and from there to the Bithynian region, which is subject to Cancer and the Moon, assigned to John: And from there to the Euxine Pontus, and both parts of the Propontis, which extends as far as the Astaean Gulf: And again, having undertaken a voyage, he came to Macedonia and Thessaly as far as the Ister, and finally was crowned with martyrdom in Patras.
[Marginal note: Thadæ. Thomas] Thaddeus in Persia, and Mesopotamia, and the upper parts of Pontus; of which we have already explained Persia as assigned to Taurus: Thomas took upper India, which was greatly held by barbaric customs, as his lot: Also the Brahmans and Hyrcanians subject to Capricorn; moreover, the Parthians and Medes, although these are under the jurisdiction of Thaddeus. In the third, western triangle, whose signs are Pisces, Cancer, and Scorpio, James the Less, John,
[Marginal note: Philipp. Ioannes.] and Philip had their lot: For he (Philip) lived in Syria, dedicated to Scorpio: John, after Palestine, traveled through Asia, and entering Ionia, stayed in Ephesus, yet sometimes journeying through the churches that belong to Phrygia and Asia Minor,
[Marginal note: Iacb. mi.] subject to Cancer and the Moon: But where James the Less went, or if he departed from Judea, we do not have from histories, but only that he was bishop of Jerusalem, a man indeed distinguished by holiness and devotion: Here he taught safely,
[Marginal note: Lucas.] where those had gathered (as Luke narrates) who were from Cilicia, Pamphylia, and regions of this kind, which are viewed by Pisces, so that he himself might rejoice in his people led to the obedience of Christ. In the fourth, northern triangle, whose signs are Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, preached Matthias, Peter, and Ja-
[Marginal note: Math.] mes the Greater: For to Matthias fell Judea, Idumaea, and hollow Syria, which
[Marginal note: Petrus.] is subject to Aries: To Peter, Italy, especially Rome, which is entirely ruled by Leo:
[Marginal note: Iacb. mi.] To James the Greater, however, Spain, where even to the present he shines with immense miracles, which, together with Celtic Gaul, Tuscany, and Arabia Felix, is disposed by Sagittarius and Mars. All these things are to be understood analogically, related to the supermundane heavens, aspects, and planets, to whose twelve goals both churches were formed: And since both have the same influx, they can be considered the same. For our church, nourished by the same influx, placed in the same order, and watered by the same four-branched river flowing from the paradise of delight, as the Israelite family, can be called the true house of Israel, and so much more felicitously, as it rejoices in a better influx. Therefore, for this (church) and for its sheep that had perished, the Savior says he came: Who did not change, but perfected, united, and led the family and the house itself to a better lot: Thus also the leaders of this family ruled it more felicitously than the leaders of that figurative house: But both with the greatest concord: about which we will immediately discuss (God leading and favoring).

--- Page 756 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 308**
**On the concordance of the Apostles with the celestial signs. Chapter XII.**

[Decorative initial E] And since not without mystery each region, subjected to its own sign, has been assigned to one Apostle, from this point I deem it necessary to traverse the concordance that each Apostle has with the sign of the region assigned to him: and so that we may do this, the proper names of the Apostles must be seen, as I have been able to extract them from the most recondite monuments of the Hebrews: which names agree with the names found in דברי הימים, that is, in the words of days.

And these names are: First, of the prince of the Apostles himself, שמעון הכפי Simehon hacephi, who by us is called Simeon Peter: for Simehon is interpreted as 'you will hear' or 'obedient'; hacephi, however, is 'rock', and not 'head', as some deceived ones assert: for it is not a Greek word, but a Syriac one signifying 'rock'. The name of the second Apostle is אלעזי Aleuzi, that is, 'God is my strength': for whom we have Andrew, who is interpreted as 'responding to fodder'. The third is James the Greater, who by his proper name is called יעקבאב Iabacobab, that is, 'oppressing': but with letters inverted, in the Hebrew manner, saying כבע cabab, it signifies 'helmet' or 'helmeted'. The name of the fourth is פוליפוס Polipos, that is, 'humble mouth' or 'humiliation of the mouth': for whom we have Philip. The fifth is ברכיה Barachiab, that is, 'blessed by the Lord': for whom I do not know how we have Bartholomew, whom they interpret as 'son of him who suspends the waters': for 'Bar' is a Chaldean rather than a Hebrew word, and Bartholomew is never found in Hebrew names. The sixth is יוחנה Iochana, whom we call John, and it is interpreted as 'grace of God'. The seventh is תמי Tammi, who is Thomas, and it signifies 'twin' or 'didymus'. The eighth is מדון Medon, i.e., 'judging' or 'discerning': for whom we have Matthew, whom some interpret as 'given', believing that name descends from the word נתן natan, which means 'he gave' or 'he donated'. The ninth is James, son of Alphaeus, or James the Less, who is properly called יעקב Iahacob, which signifies 'supplanter', or 'tracker', or 'imitator of footsteps'. The tenth is Thaddaeus, who by his proper name is called חטיפא Chatepha, that is, 'compressing' or 'inflicting violence', and not from תודה Todah, which is interpreted as 'praise'. The eleventh is Simon the Cananaean, who by his proper name is called סמם Samam, which is said to be interpreted as 'name of the mother' or 'destroying them'. The twelfth is מתניה Matan ia, that is, 'given by God', who perhaps (by God's command) was chosen in the place of the betrayer.

However, pursuing the order of encampment, and the concordance of the Apostolic families with the Israelite tribes, and the aspects of the heavens, to which they were encamped, we will begin with Sa- [Marginal note: Simeon] mam, to whom the image of the Twins, of double interpretation, has been attributed: And the 'name of the mother' suits him well: because (as I found in some most recondite monuments) he frequently invoked the name of the supreme mother, the Virgin Mary, by whose favor he destroyed the enemies of Christ and the Church: whom the Church, emulating, supplicantly [Marginal note: Church] says: 'Give me strength against your enemies.' And because he was fervent against the enemies of Christ, he was deservedly called Cananaean, that is, Zealot: who also, as if celestial

QQ iiij

--- Page 757 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

he embraced the arms of the mystical body, faith, the honor of Christ, and the Jerusalem church, which then was pre-eminent among all churches. Therefore, for its defense and the protection of Christ's faith, he endured the cross itself.

Libra (the Scales) is dedicated to Bartholomew, or Barachiah, by which things to be exchanged and distributed are weighed in an even balance; who is called "blessing of the Lord": For the blessing of the Lord ought to be distributed with an even balance and due portion, and to be weighed by an equal scale of graces, so that everyone may rest in peace: Hence it happens through him, who draws virtue from the celestial sign and super-celestial influence, who is placed over the members of the assembly.

Matthew, who is called Midon, and is interpreted as "judging" or "discerning," possesses Aquarius, which is the sign corresponding to the legs; by which, well discerning between divine and earthly things, withdrawing from earthly things, with which he abounded while sitting at the tax-office, he took up the journey after Christ to heavenly things, and wrote the Gospel, which is held as the legs and a firm column of the Christian religion.

Thaddaeus, who Chate

--- Page 758 ---
**VOLUME SEVEN. 309**

test, and draw away from God and divine things: nevertheless, not exceeding Christ in that, who drank wine, since he, dominating all, could not suffer drunkenness, from many of which things those who wish to follow the footsteps of Christ ought to abstain. John, who is also [Marginal note: John.]
called Iochana, "grace of God," agrees with Cancer, the most sublime of all signs, just as he himself was most sublime in charity, the chief of all virtues: according to that saying of Jerome: "Who by the privilege of love deserved to be honored higher than others." [Marginal note: Jerome.]
In him also the true sun showed itself most sublime, just as his doctrine and privileges indicate, just as this sun (celestial) presents itself sublime in Cancer: whose image looks towards the breast, representing that superior patron of that breast, in which, sleeping, John drank (as Jerome says) the streams of the Gospel. Philip, who is called Polipos, [Marginal note: Philip.]
agrees with Scorpio, which always carries a humble and downcast mouth to the earth, and presides over the groin: which, if taken in a bad sense, and bears the figure of a poisonous scorpion, refers to those evil scorpions who deceive men with flattery, and with simulated kindness move the groin and all vessels of lust and concupiscence into luxury: concerning whom in the Apocalypse: "Power was given to the locusts, as the [Marginal note: Apocalypse.]
scorpions of the earth have power:" Not indeed these tiny animals, but those more wicked than these, which, referring a little further down, it says: "And the locusts, namely, and scorpions had over them the angel of the abyss, whose name is Abaddon, that is, destroyer," over whom, to be trampled, Christ gave power to the Apostles. But if the scorpion is taken in a better sense, that celestial one, as it ought to be, then it is an antidote and medicine for this poisonous scorpion, just as that superior serpent, whose image the Lord commanded to be erected in the desert, was a remedy for those who were bitten by poisonous serpents: Therefore, Philip agrees with this better scorpion, who earnestly desired to see the Father for the healing of unbelief, and of the wound inflicted by the bite of the ancient serpent: which was primarily obscurity, ignorance, and inability to grasp divine things. With him also Christ had a conversation, when he was striving to provide bread for the salvation of the soul and body of the weary crowd, while they followed Christ: Who also healed the eunuch with the remedy of declared truth. He also, humble in mouth and heart, suppresses the groin of boiling lust: For no one can be continent unless God grants it: nor does God grant or hear, except the humble and one trembling at His words. Mathatia, who is also called Matthias, [Marginal note: Matthias.]
"gift of God," or "given by the Lord," because he was given to the company of the Apostles by a special lot: For the Apostles had said: "Lord, show which of these two you have chosen." He claims Aries for himself, often offered and given to God in the Law: And he had by lot the region of Judea, a region indeed distributed by lot to the chosen people. Simeon, who was called Cephas, that is, Peter, [Marginal note: Peter.]
he, having been made prince of the Apostles, rightly subjects to himself Leo, Rome, and all things directed by the Lion, king of beasts: In him the true Sun, just as the celestial one in Leo, showed maximum power: for the true Sun conferred such great power upon him that his mere shadow brought healing to the sick, and holding the highest peak in the Apostolic company and the whole Church, he po-

QQ v.

--- Page 759 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

might have power, to whom the gates and infernal powers would yield. Whence he was a true
Wise Leo, of whom the Wise Man says in Proverbs: The lion, most powerful of beasts, will not fear meeting
Iacob. anyone. James the Less, who is also called Iahacobab, 'oppressing,' but said to be 'helmeted with reversed letters,'
obtains Sagittarius, who, having been made president of Spain, was an
oppressor of paganism, covered with the helmet of salvation, and a defender of the people of Spain,
whom he took under his care, protecting them to this day with miracles and great guardianship. Nor did he
receive the guardianship of only that people, but bestowing the benefit of all prayers upon all who flee to him.
We have reviewed these things, not only to demonstrate the eminence of the Apostles with celestial signs,
by whom they were perfected, and having become heavens, they declared the glory of God everywhere,
but to suggest that harmonious correspondence which they have with super-celestial signs, and with the twelve
presidents of the celestial signs, so that just as the names of those presidents are written on the gates of the
supernal city, so these apostles, having become fitting foundations for the gates and for the whole city,
might adorn those very foundations with their names. For they drew their strength not from celestial signs,
but together with the twelve tribes from better springs, of which it is said in the psalm,
Psalu. "Bless the Lord God from the springs of Israel:" There Benjamin, there the princes of Judah,
the princes of Zebulun and Naphtali, and whatever princes belong to both the true and figurative tribes:
from which springs both families, drawing, grew immensely in number and charisms in a very short time,
but much more felicitously the Apostolic and Christian family, which grew not only to six hundred three
thousand five hundred and fifty, but into a most copious multitude from every tribe and tongue, people
and nation, whom no one could number. And not only with figurative and shadowy charisms, but with true and manifest ones.

The Tribes also correspond with the images, according to whose appearance they encamped. Chap. XIV.

ETsi (as we have said) the Israelite people were exempt from the influence of the
stars, they were nevertheless not held outside their order, but corresponded to them,
so that, divided among them by their own revolution, they might receive favor from their divine powers
and the virtue of the great name, and embrace all things that correspond to those signs,
having become lords of all, especially in the figurative family. Hence the figurative [people], to whom all things
happened in figure, was commanded to encamp according to the aspects of the heavens and signs:
For on the eastern side,
Iehuda. where are these images of Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun pitched their camps:
Judah is interpreted as 'confession' or 'celebration,' which ought to be given to the twofold nature of the Messiah,
or to God who gave a twofold law, which nevertheless is one, just as those two images of the twins are counted
as one sign: Which law
Mercur. a better Mercury interpreted, than he who presides over Gemini: for he was its true
Abacuc. interpreter: of whom Habakkuk says: "This is our God, who has found—"

--- Page 760 ---
VOLUME SEVEN. 310

...who invented every way of discipline, and handed it down to Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved: after this he was seen on earth, and conversed with men, interpreting the law itself with his own mouth: to which one approaches through a true confession of faith both with the heart and with the mouth, as Paul says: "For with the heart one believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation."
<br> [Marginal note: Paulus]
Issachar signifies reward, which is weighed according to each person's merits, as scripture says in many places: "You will render to each according to his works." Hence it is said that Issachar pitched his camp next to Libra (the Scales).
<br> [Marginal note: Issacar.]
Zebulun signifies a dwelling or boundary of beauty, which is the lodging we have after faith, and merits presented and weighed: This dwelling will be on the right hand of the highest and true tabernacle, where all the sheep who are to receive their reward are to be placed: On this right hand are those waters which are said to be above the firmament; hence he pitched his camp next to Aquarius (the Water-bearer).
<br> [Marginal note: Zabulō]
In the southern region, whose three images are Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, the Tribes of Reuben, Simeon, and Gad encamped.
<br> [Marginal note: Reuben]
Reuben, the firstborn, pitched his tents next to Taurus (the Bull), which is the chief of herds, and of domestic animals, and the strongest of them. Therefore, concerning Reuben, Jacob said in his prophetic testament: "Reuben, you are my strength."
<br> [Marginal note: Iahacob.]
He is also interpreted as "son of vision," as Leah said: "Thus I call him: because the Lord saw my affliction."
<br> [Marginal note: Lia.]
Therefore he encamped next to that Taurus, of which Moses, when blessing Joseph, said: "His glory is like the firstborn of his bull."
<br> [Marginal note: Moses.]
Reuben is indeed appropriately likened and participates in Joseph's privilege, because he saw his affliction and had compassion, freeing him when his brothers wanted to kill him, just as God saw the affliction of his mother, who was little esteemed by their father Jacob: Hence, on both counts, he is rightly called "son of vision."
Simeon erected his standards in Virgo (the Virgin), indeed a sterile sign, just as he himself was quite sterile, according to his father's oracle, who said: "I will divide Simeon and Levi in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel": For his strength was divided among his brothers, and diminished in himself.
<br> [Marginal note: Simeon]
Gad, of whom his father said, "He shall be girded backward," pitched his camp next to Capricorn (the Goat), in which the sun girds itself to go backward, reascending as it had descended: For Gad was girded backward, as our translation has it, although it is said differently in the literal truth: of which more will be said elsewhere.
<br> [Marginal note: Gad.]
In the western region, however, where the figures of Pisces (the Fish), Cancer (the Crab), and Scorpio (the Scorpion) are depicted, Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin pitched their camps.
<br> [Marginal note: Ephraim]
Ephraim directed his line next to Pisces, which is a watery and very fertile sign, just as is the nature of fish and waters. Hence, when the sun enters it, the earth begins to germinate, and fish to lay eggs in the waters; birds and animals also prepare themselves for procreation: and Ephraim, whom they interpret as "fruitful," rightly encamped next to the fertile sign: Blessing him, his grandfather Jacob, placing his right hand upon him, said: "May Ephraim grow into a multitude upon the earth."
<br> [Marginal note: Iahac.]
Manasseh, whom they interpret as "forgetfulness," pitched his camp next to Cancer (the Crab), into which sign when the Sun enters, as if forgetting its ascent, it retrogrades, beginning to descend. Hence not without mystery when his grandfather him...

--- Page 761 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

when he blessed, with crossed hands he placed his right hand upon Ephraim, the younger in birth,
[Marginal note: Manasseh.] preferring him to Manasseh, openly indicating the retrocession of Manasseh himself.
Benjamin raised his standard towards Scorpio, a western sign indeed, directly
opposite to the eastern signs, in one of which Judah encamped (as
is said in the book of Numbers and Joshua) when the land of promise was divided.
The beginning of the lot of the sons of Judah is from the highest point of the Dead Sea, and from its shore,
[Marginal note: Benjamin.] which faces south; and it proceeds against the ascent of Scorpio, against which Benjamin also
pitched his camp, so that at the same time, one from here, the other from there, embracing the celestial Scorpio,
they might prevail against the lower and evil Scorpio, and against all the poisons
of that serpent, of which it is said: "Dan shall be a serpent by the way, a cerastes in the path,
biting the horse's heel, so that its rider falls backward." For from the Tribe of Dan
came forth the serpent cerastes Jeroboam, who poisoned all Israel, leading ten
[Marginal note: Kings.] tribes to idolatry by erecting calves in Samaria, as is found in the 3rd volume of Kings.
Against which poison only the tribes of Judah and Benjamin prevailed, per-
severing in the worship of the true God, and worshipping in the temple in Jerusalem.

In the northern trigone, where are the fiery figures of Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, corre-
[Marginal note: Dan.] sponding to the supramundane northern fire, Dan, Asher, and Naphtali
pitched their camps; and how excellently Dan, which they interpret as a sign, directs its battle line to the
north, whence all evil is revealed through severe judgment. And it does this near
Aries, an animal indeed which the law commands to be offered for burning in expiation
of sin, together with the calf, which is offered for sin, so that God's judgment itself
may cease upon the sinner. Asher, who is interpreted as riches, established his
army near Leo and the north, whence gold comes; for Leo is a northern animal, ro-
[Marginal note: Asher. Moses.] bust, and most ferocious. And of Asher, Moses said when he blessed him: "Your
iron and your shoe:" which denote northern strength, as is clear to those who
[Marginal note: Jacob.] know; and concerning his abundance and riches, father Jacob said: "Out of Asher
his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties." And concerning his strength against the enemy,
Moses continues: "The rider of the heavens is your helper." And again: "You shall drive out
[Marginal note: Naphtali.] the enemy from your face and say: 'Crush them,' that is, with Leonine vigor." Naphtali arranges his troops
towards Sagittarius, or the archer (for thus the Hebrews call it); which also is in the northern
part, whence arrows are directed at the wicked: which are suppressed when repentance or merit
responds with an equal balance to sin, wickedness, and thence to punishing judgment.
Therefore, Naphtali is placed near that (sign), which not only signifies "dilatation," as is found in
Chaldean interpretations and as we said above, but also "equalization" according to the true etymology of the word.
For it comes from פתל Patal, which means "he equalized." Hence his mother Rachel, giving him a name,
said: "The Lord has compared or equalized me with my sister;" therefore his name shall be called Naphtali.

--- Page 762 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 311

On the harmony of the blessings which Jacob gave to his twelve sons with the twelve peoples to whom the twelve Apostles preached, according to the order of the signs to which they correspond. Chapter XIV.

[Decorative initial I] Now we have somewhat explained the harmony of both tribes, namely, the figurative and the apostolic family with the celestial signs: Now let us see how aptly the father of both families, Israel, prophesied concerning both at the end of his life, who said concerning Reuben: [Marginal note: Israel.] Reuben my firstborn, you are my strength, and the beginning of my sorrow, or of my virility: first in gifts, and greater in power: Or as the literal truth has it: The residue of a gift, or of swelling, and the residue of strength: You are poured out like water, you shall not grow, because you ascended your father's bed, and defiled his couch: Which oracle is for the most part quite clear: For he was the firstborn, and the beginning of the fruit of paternal virility: He also defiled his father's bed, because he mingled himself with Bilhah, his father's concubine, Rachel's handmaid, as is found in Genesis: [Marginal note: Geness.] Therefore he made himself utterly unworthy of celestial influence: hence the father said: That which was prepared for you, namely, shall not descend upon you, because you placed an obstacle, defiling the paternal chamber: Whence it follows: The residue of the gift, and the residue of strength, which was due to you by reason of primogeniture, I do not give: For you are poured out like water, therefore nothing remains that I might give you: For which we have, You shall not grow: and the reason is, because you placed an obstacle, defiling your father's bed, and polluting the way, or course of ascent. What is said here about Reuben, along with what will be said about the other sons, or tribes, has a place in the family begotten by Christ the Father, [Marginal note: CHRI- / STVS.] of whom Jacob was a type. Hence He, as the true father and redeemer of the true Israelite family, said: I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Concerning which true and figurative house, rather than concerning the one figuring it, the ancient father Jacob, about to depart shortly to his ancestors, full of the Holy Spirit, said to his sons, האספו (beazephu). Which does not mean 'gather yourselves', as a faulty translation has it, but 'increase', and 'grow in merits and light', so that you may be able to grasp those profound mysteries, which I wish to prophesy will come to you in the last time, that is, in the final age, when the Messiah will come. Afterwards follows הקבצו (hicabzu), that is, 'join yourselves', not only you who are of my stock, but all who ought to participate, or serve under God in both families: Hence he notably said: Hear, sons of Jacob, that is, you who have proceeded from my loins, and who are to proceed: And again he said: Hear, sons of Israel, that is, all who are to serve under God: For from afar, following the footsteps of truth, I am Jacob, but familiar with God, and obtaining true principality from Him for my latest sons, concerning whom it was said: You shall make them princes over all the earth. I am called Israel, foretelling those things which are to come to those better sons, and to the princes of a better family, who are born for their fathers, and constituted princes of the true

--- Page 763 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

family for those who were in the figurative. Therefore, to this figurative family I say, "Reuben my firstborn:" For this word is directed to the people responding to the first celestial sign, which is Aries, or to the angelic or divine power presiding over it: This people inhabits Judea, Idumaea, hollow Syria, E- [Marginal note: Hebrews.] gypt (as the Hebrews assert), Britain, Gaul, and Germany. Indeed, the Jewish people (to begin with the former) are called the son of vision, since almost all vision and prophecy was given to the Hebrew people: who was also adorned with the privilege of primogeniture [Marginal note: Exodus.] by the testimony of God, who says in Exodus: "Israel is my firstborn:" Whose chief and royal Tribe was Judah: whence sometimes "Jew" [Marginal note: Paul] is taken for the whole Israelite family, according to that of Paul: "to the Jew first, and also to the Greek." "You are my strength, and the beginning of my virility:" Which is verified to the letter concerning both the figurative and the true family: For the highest Father God showed the first and chief signs of excellent virtue and strength by leading His firstborn out of Egypt, and in the new family He performed the first miracles and signs in Judea and the surrounding region: Nor was He absent from Egypt, in which He spent the first years. In Gaul also He so poured out His strength that its King was adorned with the name of Most Christian, and holds a special protection for the Father in the study of letters and arms. And Germany elects an Emperor, who bears the chief insignia of principality to protect the family of Christ and God the Father. But concerning the Jewish people, what follows is verified: "The residue of the gift, and the residue of strength, which was owed to you as firstborn, I cannot give, so your evil merits demand it:" for you have defiled the bed and the honor of your Father, falsely accusing Him, bringing very many reproaches and injuries, finally conspiring with the greatest wickedness for His death: "Therefore you are poured out like water:" For if water is poured out, less remains in the vessel than from any other liquid: Hence the Jewish people are well compared to poured-out water, because all charisms were immediately emptied from them: For the Jerusalem church quickly failed, and that which was in all Judea, so that nothing of Christianity was left there, except only names, and some memory of the places in which those most revered first fruits of Christianity were celebrated: to visit which some people gather even in our time. Therefore, a tiny spark of Christianity still lives in that region, so that the Mosaic oracle may have its place: "Let Reuben live, and not die, and let him be small in number," because the place of Judea is small, and the worship of God there is small.

**Digression, why the primary order will not be preserved. Chapter XV.**

[Decorative initial N] Nor will anyone wonder if we do not always follow the same order in the application of tribes and families together with the celestial signs and the peoples corresponding to them, since sacred scripture itself changes the order multiple times: For in the blessing of father Jacob, and in the description made on the stones, which are called Urim and Thummim, the same order is preserved: but another in the arrangement of camps: another in the blessing given by Moses.

--- Page 764 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 311

another in the Apocalypse. And so that we may present the variation itself, here we will append each order separately.

| In the blessing of Jacob. | In the encampment. | In the blessing of Moses. | In the Apocalypse. |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Reuben. | Judah. | Reuben. | Judah. |
| Simeon. | Issachar. | Judah. | Reuben. |
| Levi. | Zebulun. | Levi. | Gad. |
| Judah. | Reuben. | Benjamin. | Asher. |
| Zebulun. | Simeon. | Manasseh. | Naphtali. |
| Issachar. | Gad. | Ephraim. | Manasseh. |
| Dan. | Ephraim. | Zebulun. | Simeon. |
| Gad. | Manasseh. | Issachar. | Levi. |
| Asher. | Benjamin. | Gad. | Issachar. |
| Naphtali. | Dan. | Dan. | Zebulun. |
| Joseph. | Asher. | Naphtali. | Joseph. |
| Benjamin. | Naphtali. | Asher. | Benjamin. |

Other variations are also found: For to explore the promised land, leaders were chosen in a different order, and in other places, but what has been said will suffice for the explanation and confirmation of what we have stated. Nor did those who were privy to heavenly secrets act differently in the enumeration of the leaders of the figurative and true family: For here is their varied order.

| In Matthew. | In Mark. | In Luke. | In Acts. |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Peter. | Peter. | Peter. | Peter. |
| Andrew. | James Ze. | Andrew. | John. |
| Philip. | John. | James Ze. | James Ze. |
| Bartholomew. | Andrew. | John. | Andrew. |
| James Ze. | Philip. | Philip. | Philip. |
| John. | Bartholomew. | Bartholomew. | Thomas. |
| Thomas. | Matthew. | Matthew. | Bartholomew. |
| Matthew. | Thomas. | Thomas. | Matthew. |
| James Al. | James Al. | James Al. | James Al. |
| Thaddeus. | Thaddeus. | Simon. | Simon Ca. |
| Simon Ca. | Simon Ca. | Thaddeus. | Thaddeus. |
| Judas. | Judas. | Judas. | Matthias. |

But why this was done in both families with their own reasons and sacraments, many things would have to be said, which perhaps would lead us further than the present business requires: But lest it be believed that this was done by chance, or without reason, we will assign

--- Page 765 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

at least the reason why Moses, while blessing the tribes, omitted Simeon, as if he had forgotten him, in whose place he put Joseph's son Manasseh, who is interpreted as "forgetfulness." For in this he was in agreement with Jacob, who, coming to Simeon, said: "Simeon and Levi, vessels of warring iniquity." These indeed had received robust strength from an exalted power, but because they abused it against the Shechemites and against their brother Joseph, hence the wise father, and full of God, not only declared that he did not agree with their counsel and fury, but cursed, saying: "Cursed be their fury, because it is stubborn; and their indignation, because it is harsh; because in their fury they killed a man," namely Hamor, "and Shechem his son with his people." But in heart and will they killed Joseph their brother; and in their will they undermined, or tore down, a wall, namely that of the Shechemites, or a bull. For שור (Sor) means both wall and bull. If therefore it is taken for a bull, it speaks of Joseph, of whom Moses says: "His beauty is like that of a firstborn bull." And lest such robust fury, gathered in those two tribes, should cause harm, the divine Patriarch continues: "I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel." And so the tribe of Levi was divided, which served the tabernacle for all the tribes, and were sustained by the tithes offered by them. He also did not bless Simeon, because he was not capable of blessing, nor did Moses, or Joshua his minister, assign boundaries to him when the promised land was divided, but placed him within the boundaries of Judah, so that his harsh indignation might be suppressed by Judah's good and abundant influence, and that he might become capable of some good influence from his association. But Levi, whom Jacob did not want to bless, was blessed by Moses: because he redeemed the curse given to him, and earned a blessing from the greatest zeal of divine love, which he showed against idolaters and calf-worshippers, as we read in Exodus. [Marginal note: Exo.] For Moses, seeing the calf set up in the desert, and the people playing around it, said: "If anyone is for the Lord, let him join me." And all the sons of Levi gathered to him, to whom he said: "Thus says the Lord God of Israel: Let every man put his sword upon his thigh; Go, return from gate to gate through the midst of the camp, and let each man kill his brother, his friend, and his neighbor." And the sons of Levi did according to the word of Moses, and killed on that day about twenty-three thousand men. And Moses said: "Today you have consecrated your hands to the Lord, each one in his son and his brother, that a blessing may be given to you." Behold therefore how they acquired a blessing for themselves: which Phinehas confirmed, when, zealous for the Lord his God, he took a dagger and pierced through the genital members Zimri, son of Salu, leader of the tribe of Simeon, together with Cozbi the Midianite, daughter of the prince of the Midianites, with whom he was lying in injury to the God of Israel, from whom many had turned away, initiated into Baal-peor, and mingled with the Moabites and Midianites: and by the death of one, inflicted with such zeal, the sin of Israel was purged, as we read in the book of Numbers. [Marginal note: Numer.] And just as the blessing was restored to the zealous Levites, of which they had been deprived because of the crime of a violated covenant and fratricide, so to zealous Phinehas was given an everlasting priesthood. But since Simeon by no good deed—

--- Page 766 ---
SEVENTH TONE.
313

had redeemed the committed crime, he is blessed neither by father Jacob nor by the lawgiver: he receives neither boundaries nor a particular lot in the distribution of the promised land. For he was placed in Judah, as we have in the nineteenth chapter of the book of Joshua. [marginal note: Joshua] If therefore, we also, postponing him, assign him to some suitable place, it will be done according to his sacrament and reason. Other tribes also, not without reason, are to be placed here first (as we have assigned) and have been transmuted.

Continuation of the agreement of the blessings of Issachar and Zebulun with their peoples. Chapter XVI.

**I**ssachar, second in encampment with the second sign, which is Taurus, seems to me to be fitting. For the oracle says of him: "Issachar is a strong ass," that is, patient and robust in the study of letters, to which that tribe was dedicated. The ass also savors of I know not what clemency, and of its influx, from which wisdom comes, as the more secret Theologians say. [marginal note: Theologians] But setting aside these more hidden mysteries for the time being, let us pursue the literal meaning. For he who ought to progress in doctrine is required to be robust; therefore, in blessing, he is equated with the ass, and in the celestial signs, with Taurus, the most robust of all beasts of burden. He saw here rest and leisure for study, because it was good, and the land in which that tribe dwelt, without the wandering that merchants and soldiers are accustomed to do, because it was delightful; therefore, he adapted his shoulders to bear the great burden that is in the study of letters. And he became a servant to tribute: For Issachar in a way served the tribe of Zebulun, who, being rich and merchants, provided necessities for those of the tribe of Issachar who were devoted to the study of letters, as the Hebrews assert. Hence Moses said, when he distributed the portion of his blessing: "Rejoice, Zebulun, in your going out," that is, when you travel here and there, bringing goods; "and Issachar in your tents," that is, he will dwell or frequent them, so that he may receive the benefits of life as a reward, just as his name indicates, which is interpreted as "reward." If, however, these words are fitted to the regions directed by Taurus, let us see: For those are the maritime regions of Asia Minor, Persia, Media, Parthia, the Cyclades, Cyprus. In the maritime regions of Asia Minor were the seven churches, to which that most famous and unique prophecy in the New Testament, revealed to John on the island of Patmos, which is now called Chios, was dedicated, as is said at the beginning of that vision: "John to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace to you and peace from Him who was and who is and who is to come, and from the seven spirits who are before His throne," as if those seven chief spirits held a special care for those churches, which are Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea, near which cities is the island of Patmos, one of the Cyclades, which is now called Chios, where that divine revelation was made. And in these places, with the surrounding regions, the study of human letters flourished greatly; and many men most famous in doctrine came forth from them. For from Ephesus, Heraclitus, called the Ephesian; from the city of Scepsis, in the conti-
RR

--- Page 767 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

on the continent, situated near Antandrus next to Mytilene, were the Socratic philosophers Erastus and Coriscus, to whom letters from Plato are found to have been sent. There was also Neleus, son of Coriscus, Demetrius the grammarian, and Metodorus. From nearby Pergamum was Galen. There, by the great care of the Attalid kings, a library was established, and in it, by Apellicon, the Aristotelian and Theophrastean books were deposited. For Aristotle left his library and school to Theophrastus; and he was the first of all Greeks to collect books, and he taught the kings of Egypt the arrangement of a library. Theophrastus also handed it over to Neleus; Neleus indeed carried it to Scepsis and gave it to his descendants, indeed to unskilled men, whose negligence caused the books to be damaged by dampness and eaten by moths; but transcribed by Apellicon, they were full of errors, as Strabo reports. [Marginal note: Strabo] Whence by some, Aristotelian and Theophrastean philosophy is judged faulty, and not that pure and chaste philosophy which its authors handed down. But however the matter stands, the first library of Athenian learning, which was the mother of studies, was erected in Pergamum. But from the vicinity of Athens, it was quite consistent with those maritime regions, as they are situated in the region of European Greece; for between those maritime regions and Athens are the Cyclades islands, separated from both only by some stretch of sea, which together with those maritime regions directed from Taurus, agree, and with the studious tribe of Issachar. From Coos we have Hippocrates, and, as some assert for certain, Homer. Among these is also Delos, famous for the temple and oracle of Apollo, whence the ancients received great nourishment for their wisdom. Also towards the west, near Rhodes, is Halicarnassus, famous for its Dionysius; and from Mytilene, Pittacus, one of the seven wise men, emerged. It would be lengthy to recount all the famous men who came forth from those places, and with how much labor their inhabitants dedicated themselves to the study of letters.

But approaching Persia, there was Magic, which is a more secret philosophy, whence came those who first adored Christ. Thence Charundas, most excellent in that doctrine, and Avicenna, as some assert. [Marginal notes: Char. Auicena.] And although their school was devoted to the practice and adornment of riding and archery, they were not lacking in the study of letters in the most recondite matters; whence they were most diligent in sacred things. I omit many other things that could be said about the study that the inhabitants of these regions had, since these few suffice to indicate how neatly the influence of the heavens over them aligns with the influence of the tribe of Issachar, whose study was to apply themselves to humanly acquired doctrine; for that which was divinely revealed was given especially to the Levites.

But to follow the encampments, Zebulun held the third place in the eastern quarter, to whom we will assign the third sign, which is Gemini, and the first in its triplicity. Whose regions are Hyrcania, Armenia, Margiana, Cyrenaica, Marmarica, and the lower region of Egypt. And to him it was said by the paternal oracle: "Zebulun shall dwell by the shore of the seas," and not "of the sea," as our translation has it; "and he shall be at the harbor of ships," (supply "he shall have borders"), "and his border shall extend to Sidon." Well

--- Page 768 ---
**SEVENTH TONE.** [Page number] **314**

(Zebulun) is said to extend to the shore of the seas, because from the eastern region it has Getulia and
ומגדלא (u-Magdala), which our people call Magdalum, or Medala. There also exists Tiberias with its sea. From the western side, however, it has Mount Carmel with a port, which is now called Castrum Peregrinorum (Pilgrims' Castle): It also has the port of Ptolemais, which is now called Acre: and it extends along the Syrian Sea as far as Tyre and Sidon, although erroneous figures assign Ptolemais to the tribe of Asher: For, as we expressly have in the oracle, Zebulun extends as far as Sidon: Nor do we read of any other privilege given to this tribe, except seas and and ports, through which and to which they might transport their goods: All these things follow the regions directed by Gemini: the first of which is Hyrcania, situated by the Hyrcanian or Caspian Sea: against which sea Greater Armenia is also directed. The region of Cyrenaica also extends into the sea towards Greece: Marmarica, however, and the Lower Region of Egypt are extended almost into the same sea: All these regions are content with that which occurs within them, by navigation and merchandise, just like the tribe of Zebulun, to which they correspond, unless we elevate the meanings of the oracle to higher senses, and to the supramundane sea, about which there is no need to speak for now.

On the harmony of the blessing given to Judah with the people directed by the sign corresponding to it. Chapter XVII.

[Decorative initial A] In the southern part, in the second order, Reuben placed his face in the first place, which place, however, is the fourth in the order of encampment. But since, in expounding the paternal blessings, following the order of birth, and imitating the father, we have placed him (Reuben) in the first place, in this fourth order, we will place Judah, born in the fourth place, and blessed in the fourth place, with these words: "Judah, your brothers shall praise you, and honor you, namely as a king:" For to him was given the royal scepter, secretly flourishing in that tribe until David came, publicly exalted in that royal scepter, [Marginal note: CHRIST.] which also lasted in kings, or leaders, until Shiloh, that is, the true Messiah: Who, however, did not abolish the kingdom, but changed it for the better and more happily, promising it to all his true and pious followers, saying: "Come, blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you." Since, therefore, this kingdom was in the loins of Judah, together with that king before whom every knee bows, therefore it follows: "The sons of your father shall bow down before you: and with true authority and royal vigor, your hands shall be on the necks of your enemies:" "Judah is a lion's whelp or terror." For גור (Gur) signifies both a whelp and terror: But it is better (as I think) understood here as terror, because it follows what precedes: "Your hands on the necks of your enemies:" and it well suits what follows: "From the prey, my son, you have gone up:" All these things are most especially verified in Christ, of whom John says: "The Lion of the tribe of Judah has conquered." And rightly is Christ from the tribe of יהודה (Yehudah), since this name most aptly suits Christ himself, in whom are the four letters of the great name of God, with the dalet (ד) interposed, which signifies four in number, indicating the quadrangular body which God himself assumed, clothing himself according to Paul.

RR ij

--- Page 769 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

that of the Apostle: *And being found in fashion as a man.* He therefore was the one who, ascending from the prey, led out those bound from the pit by the blood of his covenant, humbled first, as follows כרע *carah*, that is, he knelt, or humbled himself, and did not rest, as our translation has it. *You couched as a lion, and as a lioness*, who, when they wish to leap, first lie down on the ground with great force: So Christ humbled himself, *becoming obedient unto death*, then rising with such impetus that he might cast down all enemies, and acquire for himself a name which is above every name. But that which follows: *The scepter shall not depart from Judah* (as we have explained here and elsewhere above) can be understood of no other than Christ from those things which were said there, and from that which follows: *and he shall be the expectation of the nations:* For Christ alone came for the salvation of the nations. *He shall bind his foal to the vine.* The vine above all trees gives abundant and excellent fruit: To which Christ bound his foal, while he was, namely, in infancy, and childhood, and adolescence, always suppressing animal appetites, bearing fruit like a vine, nay, being himself the true vine. *And to the branch of the grape*, or to the twig *my son his ass*, that is, the animal part now fertile, and made pregnant by the spirit and by that heavenly countenance: He calls it by a feminine noun, because this lower part is usually called by this gender, but the upper part by the masculine, as [Marginal note: Genesis. Mercury. Plato.] it is held in Genesis: *Male and female he created them*, as Mercury well explains in Pymander, and Plato in Symposium. *He shall wash his garment in wine, and in* [Marginal note: John.] *the blood of the grape his cloak:* Which John testifies to have been done literally in the Apocalypse, saying: *He has washed us in his own blood:* Us, indeed, his creatures, who are also called his garments, because by creating us, he clothed himself in various garments, as we shall discuss in its proper place (God willing): Or he will wash himself, or us in himself, who was made our garment, according to that of the Apostle: *Put on our Lord Jesus Christ:* all of which agree with the peoples directed by the Lion, to whom he responds, who was recently called both a lion's cub and a lioness: Which peoples and regions [Marginal note: Ptolemy. Manilius] are Italy (as it pleases Ptolemy), although Manilius subjects it to Libra: Also Apulia, Sicily, Phoenicia, Chaldea, Orsenia, or Orchenia: The inhabitants of which regions [Marginal note: Ptolemy.] (as it pleases Ptolemy) are skilled in governance, and cultivators of all praiseworthy arts, and especially Italy, shining for a long time with Imperial majesty, and always with Pontifical dignity: For from Peter onwards, the Roman church has always held primacy among others: whose bishop alone is called in canon, just as the city itself has always been resplendent with the special aspect of the sun. In this region also there have been eloquent orators, most excellent poets, and men outstanding in every faculty, so that this people becomes the most elegant member of the mystical body, to whom those things which were said of the head under the name of his ancient progenitor can be most fittingly applied: For beginning with the name, it can well be said Judah, who is interpreted as confessor and praise, because he always rightly confessed and praised Christ the Father. *Your brothers shall praise you:* because all Latins have always praised and venerated the Roman faith and church, even if some of the most recent, led astray by envy or foolish zeal

--- Page 770 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 315

may tear and bite: but with God moderating, they will at last piously confess what they impiously denied. Nor only those who most recently strayed from the womb and spoke falsehoods, but also those who previously departed from the womb of their mother, the Greeks and Agarenes, all brought back to one fold and made sons of the true mother church, will praise you holding the place of Christ's head. The sons of your mother will also adore you, because all churches revere you as royal and pre-eminent. Your hands are on the necks of your enemies, because power has been given to you, against which the gates of hell and the might of enemies cannot prevail. And the terror of this lion Judah, that is, of Christ, or of him holding His place, or of him purely confessing Him, invades all, when it is aroused against someone excommunicating or cursing: Which the Greeks proved, suffering the penalty of the curse given by Eugene IV, because they had come fictitiously to the Council of Florence, and had deceitfully given a pledge regarding the matters discussed there to be observed. Nor will I delay in bringing forth those things which happened to those despising the ministers and Vicars of Christ, indeed, Christ Himself saying: "He who despises you, despises me." Resting, you lay down like a lion, for a long time, namely until Constantine the Great, doing nothing publicly at that time, and with full jurisdiction. [Marginal note: CHRIST.] Who will rouse him, that is, his empire? Certainly no mortal, but divine power, which moved the minds of emperors and kings of the earth to embrace the faith of Christ, by submitting their necks to His yoke and dominion. The scepter, that is, of the pontificate, will not be taken away from this Italian and Roman church: nor the lawgiver from his thigh, that is, his election, until either the Messiah comes in His second advent, or He whom He will send as a restorer of His scattered affairs. And this will be the expectation of the nations, that under him there may be one fold and one shepherd: and all will serve Christ and God with one shoulder and one worship. Then the church will bind whatever offspring it generates to Christ the vine, and to the branches of the vine, O my son, its she-ass: For there is in this a word either of the Father to Christ, His beloved Son, or of Christ to His vicar concerning the binding of the church to the vine, which He Himself is, signified by the fruitful she-ass and mother of foals. He will also wash his robe in wine, and in that blood of the grape, of which it was said: "This is the chalice of the new and eternal testament, which will be poured out for you and for many unto the remission of sins." Your eyes are more beautiful than wine, because they have become true Christian observers of milk and heavenly things: which observation and knowledge is far better than the observation of lower things denoted by wine. And his teeth, ruminating that heavenly food, are whiter than snow: Moses, corroborating this blessing, says: [Marginal note: Moses.] "Hear, O Lord, the voice of Judah," that is, of him truly confessing and praising you, "and bring him to his people," that is, the assembly of the elect. The hands of Judah himself, that is, of the incarnate Word, will fight for him, that is, for the people: and his helper against his adversaries, who said to Peter, whose principal seat is Italian and Roman: "I have prayed for you, Peter, that your faith may not fail:" [Marginal note: CHRIST.] and a part of Italy is Apulia and Calabria, which was once called Magna Graecia, and those neighboring...
RR iij

--- Page 771 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

in Sicily all directed by Leo: with whom are understood all churches joined and united with the Latin and Roman Church. Also from the Chaldeans are the Maronites, as they themselves profess, and their language indicates, who, following the Roman Church, observe its rite entirely above all Orientals, with the language alone excepted:
[Marginal note: Strabo] To these Chaldeans also belong the Orcheni, who (according to Strabo) were certain Chaldean astronomers. The Phoenicians also were among the first who received Christ:
[Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] for from there was that Syrophoenician woman, of whom Christ said: O woman, great is your faith. And to this day the praises of God and His Christ are rendered in Phoenicia, namely in the city of Beirut, located in the heart of Phoenicia, where there is a church of the Friars Minor, into which not only the friars themselves, but also the Maronites, and all who observe the rite of the Roman Church, gather.

Concerning the harmony of the other two blessed tribes of this trigone with the signs and peoples corresponding to them. Chapter XVIII.

[Large decorative initial A] The other two tribes are Simeon and Gad: whose oracle (Simeon's) has already been explained to have been rather a curse and a certain division, than a blessing: Hence, empty of office and influence by Moses, full of God, and Joshua, his most pious minister, he was most piously placed in the tribe of Judah, lest, deprived of divine influence and abandoned to himself, he should be utterly or largely overthrown. And since these Simeonites did not have their own borders, nor a full portion of the divided region, they lived (as the Hebrews say) from profit acquired in teaching, asserting that there was no scribe or teacher except from the lineage of Simeon: Which things seem to me to have a place among the peoples and regions subject to Aquarius: which are Arabia, Ethiopia, Sarmatia, Oxiana, Sogdiana, Azania, and Media: For the Arabs have no determined region, but live within the borders of others, although Arabia is threefold: Felix (Happy), Deserta (Desert), and Petrea (Stony), since not all the multitude of that nation is contained within them, which extends from there beyond the Syrians, Phoenicians, Palestinians, and Carthaginians, always passing between maritime peoples and the Persian, Egyptian, or Libyan deserts, through the region of Marmarica and Cyrenaica, up to the borders of Mauretania and the Atlantic Sea, so that in them that oracle may find its place: 'I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel', which is understood to figuratively comprehend all the people and number of the elect. But the scattered and divided Arabs are the Hagarites:
[Marginal note: Genesis] of whom the angel of the Lord said to Hagar (as we read in Genesis), speaking of their father, and consequently of the whole family: 'He will be a wild man: he will pitch his tents in the region of his brothers'. These also live by the aid of others through military art, or by running here and there, enriched by continuous robberies and plunder, and the devastation of fields, according to that which the same oracle says: 'His hand against all'. For they do not build, nor cultivate lands, nor have fixed dwellings, but they run here and there, carrying their homes with them, which are indeed tents,

--- Page 772 ---
**VOLUME SEVEN.** [Page number:] **316**

so that they may seem to be gathered in the territories of others, rather than in their own. These are followed by the Ethiopians, born from Cush, son of Ham, who lead the same, and a worse life, so that they may seem to atone for the curse which Noah gave to his descendants through their ancestor Ham, because he had slandered his father, shamefully mocking him. For they sell their own children for sustenance; and among them are some not fully black in color, coming from the region between Egypt and Ethiopia, who wander throughout the whole world, setting up tents outside cities in fields and at crossroads; by deceptions, and exchanges, and divinations from the lines of hands, and delighting in these frauds they acquire sustenance, who are called by the common name Cingani, and they themselves are divided into diverse peoples. But concerning the Sarmatians or Hyperboreans, whom others call Arimaspi, I will say no more than what I find written, since authors have said nothing precise about them: for they are peoples situated in Sarmatia, just as the Medes are among the Hyrcanians, Parthians, Armenians, and Persians. For Media, divided into two parts, one is called Greater, whose metropolis is Ecbatana, which the Parthians use as a royal city, living there in summer, since it is cold. But in winter they lead their life in Seleucia, which is along the Tigris near Babylon. The other part of Media is called Atropatia, named after the leader Atropates, whose inhabitants, connected by kinship with the Armenians, adjacent to Armenia to the east, but especially adhering to the Persians as confederates. For Ahasuerus, whom we call Assuerus, was King of the Persians and Medes, as we read in the book of Esther.
[Marginal note:] Esther.
Whose birth and origin was in Susa, which the Hebrews call Shushan (שושן), but we call Susis. And it is a region from the borders of the Persian coast as far as the Babylonian region to the mouths of the Tigris, about three thousand stadia, having the Medes to the north. Concerning whom I find nothing worthy of report, except that they always learned to be subject to others, adhering to them. There remain the regions of Oxiana, Sogdiana, and Azania, among the Bactrians, and Massagetae, Nomads, and that which is called the Sacred Region. All of which, since they are obscure, have provided no memory of themselves to writers, except that they have no homes, and live on livestock and milk, especially mare's milk. But they are somewhat named by neighboring regions, within whose borders they dwell, for Bactriana shines with its Zoroaster; but the Massagetae by Queen Tomyris, who defeated Cyrus, king of the Persians. But the towns of Azania have been erased along with their memory. The last family of that triangle was Gad, who is the first son of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid, but Jacob's seventh, whence his name, from two letters signifying seven, is most appropriate.
[Marginal note:] Hebrews.
For the Hebrews write the name itself with only two letters in this manner, גד Gad, of which ג (gimel) renders three, and ד (dalet) renders four in number, which, joined together, constitute seven. But we, following the order of encampment, will assign the sixth place to him, for we cannot follow all their orders, since they are varied, in one continuous text. Therefore, his blessing was: "Gad (means) happy," or "good fortune will make us fortunate"; and "he himself will be fortunate at the heel, or at the footprint." And I do not know how we have translated it: "Gad, girded, will fight against him, and he himself will be girded backward." For Gad (means) not 'girded,' but 'happy' or
RR iiij

--- Page 773 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

It signifies "fortunate": as we have explained by the mother, or by the mistress of the parturient handmaid, who, having received that son, said בגד bagad, that is, "in prosperity," or "good fortune," or, as our translation has it, "happily." Whose happiness, or good fortune, father Jacob declared in the heel: but Moses extended it even to the head, saying: "Blessed in breadth is Gad, like a lion he lay down, and he will plunder robustly even to the head." Indeed, Moses expanded and increased his influence and good fortune: because he bravely and faithfully preceded all Israel in war against the nations, which the Lord had commanded to be expelled from the land promised to that [Marginal note: Nume.] people, as we read in the book of Numbers. However, his good fortune was not priesthood, nor kingship, nor wisdom, nor any distinction acquired by [Marginal note: Aristo.] industry or talent: because (as Aristotle testifies) where this flourishes, there is less of fortune; but in war, possessions, and riches, by which those who abound are commonly called fortunate. Concerning the riches of this tribe, we read in the same place: "Reuben and Gad had many cattle, and they had much substance in livestock." Hence they wished to dwell beyond the Jordan in those most fertile pastures: Hence it agrees with his Capricorn, next to which he had encamped, and with the regions and peoples directed by him: which are Macedonia, Thrace, Illyria, India, Ariana, and Gedrosia. The Macedonians, moreover, were fortunate in war, especially under Alexander as leader: and also very rich in cattle [Marginal note: Strabo] and silver: therefore (as Strabo says) Philip established the greatest revenues from metals and the remaining fertility of the lands from there: To the south of which Macedonia is the town of Thessalonica, once most opulent with spoils. The Thracians and Illyrians also abound in many riches: famous for Byzantium, Adrianople, and many towns, merchandise, and riches. India Ariana, moreover, is most rich in gold from the Indus River. Gedrosia, however, or Gerdosia, abounds only in aromatics, especially myrrh and nard. Therefore, all these, having obtained the blessing of Gad, are most excellently equated with him in this particular gift. However, by election and faith, if there is any in them, they are reckoned in the Israelite family.

*On the agreement of the blessings of the three families who encamped*
*against the third trigon, with the peoples directed by it. Chapter XIX.*

[Illuminated initial 'I' depicting two figures seated outdoors] N the third Trigon encamped Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin: To the first of these (Ephraim and Manasseh) was given simultaneously by their grandfather Jacob a blessing of this kind: "God, who has fed me from my youth until this present day, the angel who has delivered me from all evil, bless these boys, and let my name be invoked upon them, and the names of their fathers, and let them grow into a multitude upon the earth." Nor do we have anything else in particular concerning Ephraim in the paternal blessings, except that Jacob, with crossed hands, placed his right hand upon him, though he was the younger, saying: "This one will be greater than his younger brother." But why he preferred the younger and postponed the elder, that is because the father of Joseph, having received Manasseh, said: "God has made me forget all my toil, and..."

--- Page 774 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 317**

my father's house: Which word was spoken less advisedly, because it was to the injury of his father's house, with some displeasure, not without fault, and disturbance of the heart of him who uttered it. Therefore, Ephraim was preferred to him by Jacob, full of God, in whose birth Joseph said with a better disposition: 'God has made me grow, or abound, in the land of my affliction.' From this, the latter obtained good things, while the former atoned for the father's bad disposition: And pursuing both, Joseph added: 'In you shall Israel be blessed, and it shall be said: May it be to you as Ephraim and Manasseh.' Similarly, Moses, pursuing and blessing them together, said: 'These are the multitudes of Ephraim, and these are the thousands of Manasseh.' And since they were blessed together by both, we, following those fathers, will speak of them together, upon whom also came the most abundant blessing given to their father Joseph, to whom Jacob said: 'Joseph is a son to be rewarded, a son to be rewarded,' for the benefit, namely, of the utmost generosity shown to his brother and fathers in Egypt, when famine raged. Nor is our translation 'a growing son' correct, since that word פורת (porat) is not Hebrew coming from פרה (parah), which means 'it bore fruit' or 'it grew', but is an Egyptian word meaning 'to be rewarded' or 'worthy of reward'. And comely in appearance, the daughters of the Egyptians, namely, ran about or walked upon the wall, so that they might see, namely, his beauty: And this is said literally, which for now we follow, omitting the deeper mysteries that lie hidden in the inner chambers: They made him bitter.

--- Page 775 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

indicates piety, Abraham was blessed. Joseph therefore, since he was inferior to Abraham, and did not have in his tribe, or in his tribes, a prophet suckling those exalted breasts, is therefore blessed only with an inferior blessing, which is the doubling of his family, when he was granted the privilege of two tribes: of which one was called Ephraim, and the other Manasseh. Therefore it follows: "The blessings of your father are strengthened, and increased above the blessings of the conceiver, or of conception, and of the doubling of the tribe." Which blessing will extend even to the desire of the exalted hills, or of the hills of the world, or of hidden things: because his desire will not only be for multiplying his family and earthly possessions, but he also desired to draw something from the exalted hills: and he drew as much as was given to him from above. It follows: "And all these things shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the Nazirite," that is, separated from his brothers, according to what is said above: "I give you one portion beyond your brothers." For it was right that he should receive something separate from his father, who had been unjustly cast out by his brothers: from which blessing, as far as was right, expanded and contained within its limits, not departing
[Marginal note: Moses.] Moses says: "From the blessings of the Lord, his land, namely, let it be blessed, from the fruits of heaven, and from the dew, and from the hidden abyss, beneath that land, namely, and from the dew, which is the ultimate source of heavenly blessing." He continues the blessing concerning these lower things, saying: "From the fruits of the sun," that is, generated by the sun, "and from the fruits of the moon," that is, produced by the moon (for the sun generates, and the moon brings forth offspring), "and from the top of the eastern mountains, and from the fruits of the hills of the world:" For the mountains of the east, which in Hebrew is called קדם *kedem*, signify the mountains of the upper region, in which the paradise of delight is said to have been planted. But the hills of the world signify these lower ones, concerning whose fruits it follows: "And from the fruits of the earth, and its fullness, and the fertility of sheep, namely:" "The Dweller of Sinai," that is, he who would dwell and give the law on Sinai, "let him bring [these blessings] upon the head of Joseph, and upon the crown of his Nazirite," as has recently been explained. "The firstborn of the bull," that is, of that exalted one whom Ezekiel saw to the left of the supreme tribunal, "is his glory or beauty:" "And the horns of the unicorn are his horns:" for with those horns an animal defends itself from attackers: and with these, others are defended from poison: So Joseph was not only defended from the snares of his brothers, but also from the false accusation of Potiphar's wife. He also defended his father and brothers from destruction by a severe famine.

But let us return to Ephraim. He pitched his camp near the fish: Of which image, the regions are Lycia, Lydia, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Phazania or Hazania, as others say, Nazamonitis, and Garamantica. Lycia, and Lydia, and Mysia are inland regions of Asia Minor from Mount Olympus even to Pamphylia, which Cilicia succeeds, indeed opulent and fertile, but with boundaries so confused that ancient memory scarcely remains: For since often different ones have ruled, some have been confused, others utterly overthrown: For after Troy was captured, the Phrygians and Mysians ruled there, then the Lydians, after them the Aeolians and Ionians, then the Persians and Macedonians,

--- Page 776 ---
VOLUME SEVEN. 318

are fertile in fruits, they agree with Ephraim, who is interpreted as 'fruitful'.
Cilicia, however, is famous for Tarsus and Paul: who, although he was of the tribe of Benjamin, was nevertheless in the region corresponding to Ephraim, concerning whom that blessing was given to his father Joseph: 'From there, the shepherd of the stone of Israel:' For Paul was the universal shepherd of the sheep of the stone: who is Christ, and the true foundation of all Israel. The Garamantian region, however, in inner Libya, extends beyond Marmarica as far as Ethiopia, under Egypt as far as Ammon: which is similar [to it] in being palm-bearing and watery: where there are also Nazamones, Psylli, and part of the Getulians: Whose regions are reported to be quite fertile, but in particular not much known to us: because access there for our people is difficult and rare. Manasseh, however, pitched his camp against Cancer: of which image are Bithynia, Phrygia, Colchica, Numidia, Africa, Carthage, and Carchedonia, regions indeed not endowed with greater dignity than the oracle concerning Manasseh bears: for this [tribe] is counted among the twelve tribes as quite fruitful, and itself sharing in the common portion of the blessing.
Nor is anything more singular said about those regions than about this family, concerning which Moses says: 'And these [Marginal note: Moses;]
are the thousands of Manasseh:' Which can indeed be understood in two ways: either because it is a numerous tribe expressed by those thousands: or an influx is denoted, which is from 'aleph', which signifies a thousand, but primarily God himself, from whom all good [comes], [Marginal note: k]
as if to say: 'These are the things which God has granted to you, so that you may live quite abundantly and with a common life among other peoples.' Nor is any other distinguishing mark particularly attributed to it. Benjamin held the third place in this trigone against Scorpio, who rules Syria, Commagene, Cappadocia, Metagonite, Mauretania, and Getulia. His blessing, however, given by his father Jacob, was this: 'Benjamin is a ravenous wolf; in the morning he devours the prey, and in the evening he divides the spoil.' But Moses seems to pursue it with a long distance, saying: 'The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by him; he shall dwell between his shoulders all the day long, and he shall rest between his shoulders.' But, as is clear to one who understands well, the words of both agree on the same point: Literally, both prophesied about Saul, the only king from the tribe of Benjamin, for he was like a wolf who secretly seized prey: for he secretly entered into the kingdom, which was due to the tribe of Judah, and he held this from the morning until the evening of his life. And what Jacob says 'from morning until evening,' Moses implies 'throughout the whole day,' when he asserts that he will dwell in the chamber, that is, the royal tribunal: For when the course of his life was completed, the spoil was divided, because the kingdom was transferred to the house of David and to the house of Judah, which had been taken from it, as if prey, during the day of Saul's life: For the kingdom had rested (says Moses), namely in Saul's time, upon his shoulders: [Marginal note: The same;]
Indeed, upon those shoulders, concerning which it is said: 'Saul was taller than any of the people from his shoulders upward.' But let us see what [this means] for the people corresponding to the tribe of Benjamin, and who pitched their camp next to Scorpio: For under this image in Asia is Syria, continuous with Commagene, which receives its borders from Mount Taurus: beyond which, and subsequent Armenia, is Cappadocia directed by the same sign: In Africa, however—

--- Page 777 ---
**CANTICLE THE SECOND**

Moreover, Metagonia, which is contiguous to New Carthage, Mauritania, and Getulia:
whose peoples in the morning ate that prey, about which it is said: "My son, you have gone up to the prey." For the Redeemer of the world proposed heavenly food for us to eat, as a kind of prey, snatched from the Father, or from the hands of the enemies hindering us: Which these peoples ate in the morning, when they received the faith of Christ, who was crucified a little earlier: But as the evangelical day was waning, they badly divided the spoils, adhering to the most impure Muhammad, both those Asiatic peoples and African ones, who all have been divided from Christ for many ages: In which division they will endure for a very short time (as I believe), because soon (if I am not mistaken), by God's command, that day will come when there will be one fold and one shepherd: Which peoples were divided in some way, but in another way not at all, just as we read in the third volume of Kings about that ancient and figurative family, in which ten tribes were divided from the house of Judah, in which was the kingdom and the temple, and from the empire of the Davidic lineage: For just as they were not entirely abandoned, although found to be apostates in the adoration of calves: since prophets were sent to those kings to guide and instruct those peoples, so that God might always rule in Jacob, In a similar way, He has pursued this family, divided from that which is truly Christian, even though it adhered to the most impure Muhammad: For both laws were left to them, namely the Mosaic and the evangelical: from either of which they received something, which they observe, venerating Christ born of a virgin, although they deny His suffering, so that Christ Himself may rule in Jacob and in all the ends of the earth.

**On the agreement of the blessings of the remaining tribes, which are encamped**
**against the fourth trigon, with the peoples directed by it. Chapter XX.**

[Large decorative initial 'I' containing two figures] In the fourth ternary of signs, Dan, Asher, and Naphtali pitched their camps: For Dan agrees with the peoples directed by the Virgin, who are the Greeks, Achaeans, Cretans, Babylonian Mesopotamians, Assyrians, and Elamites: For Greece, extending wider boundaries (as geographers assign) from the Bosphorus to Acarnania, which includes Achaia (which they call Phthia), and also Crete with many adjacent islands. In these regions, the study of letters, acquired by human intellects, flourished. Nor less in the Ba-
[Marginal note: Strabo.] bylonian region, whose beginning from the east is Susa, as Strabo reports, and Pto-
[Marginal note: Ptolem.] lemy shows: It is surrounded by the Euphrates from the north: by Arabia on another side: and is bounded by the Armenians to the north: Which was so fervent in studies, especially mathematical ones, that the Babylonians were even divided into several sects: For some of them, called Chaldeans, professing Genethlialogy, were divided into Orcheni and Borispeni: Of these, the Borispeni are named from the city of Borispa, dedicated to Diana and Apollo. Mesopotamia is situated between the Tigris and the Euphrates, a region indeed most fertile in pastures, contiguous to the Babylonian province, and hence a participant in its doctrine. For here Abraham, easily the chief of all true astronomers, first learned divine astrology from men, but more perfectly through divine illumination.

--- Page 778 ---
**THE SEVENTH TONE.** [Page number] **319**

To whom are contiguous the Assyrians and Elamites, filled with no ordinary wisdom, as is proven in John Damascene, Pherecides Syrus, Bardasanes, Eusebius of Caesarea, and many others: For these were most famous men after the Apostles and Prophets, who were themselves Assyrians: But we do not count these among the wise of doctrine acquired by human ingenuity, since their wisdom far exceeded human wisdom. Therefore, concerning these peoples and princes who were devoted to human wisdom, it can be said what Jacob said about Dan: "Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes." [Marginal note: Jacob.] Because, namely, among these peoples there will be wise men for judging. Moses continues the same, [Marginal note: Moses:] although he uses different words: For he says, "Dan is a lion's whelp." Indeed, he himself was not the king of beasts, like Judah, of whom it is written: "The Lion of the tribe of Judah has conquered." But he is called a lion's whelp, as if a king's son: For to no tribe was true kingship given, except to the tribe of Judah; but to the others by a certain participation in that royal inheritance. But what follows from Jacob, when he says: "Dan shall be a serpent by the way, a cerastes in the path, that bites the horse's heels, so that its rider falls backward," all this refers to Samson, who was of the tribe of Dan, indeed a wondrous and astonishing example of strength and fortitude: For he bit the hooves and feet of the horse, that is, the strength of the Philistines, when, having torn out the columns of the palace, by which it was supported as if by certain feet, he caused the princes and more distinguished men of the Philistines who were present there to fall. But since all these things were decreed by God, therefore it follows: "Your salvation," that is, that you may be saved from these falls, or, interpreting "your salvation" as "your strength," you shall await it from the Lord: For which we have: "I will await your salvation, O Lord." Which Moses also explains in other words, saying: "It shall flow," namely, this your strength, "abundantly from Bashan," that is, from that super-worldly richness, from which comes every good gift. Nor are there lacking those who interpret this oracle differently, namely concerning the Antichrist, whom they believe will be born from the tribe of Dan, who will be a heresiarch and a twisted serpent, causing all whom he bites to fall: Whose power will flow from Bashan, that is, from the dryness of grace and the richness of temporal things; for Bashan signifies both. Hence they also believe that this tribe of Dan was omitted by John in the counting of the sealed, lest the origin of such great wickedness be counted among the number of the blessed: For he bites those horses, of which Habakkuk says: "You who ride upon your horses," [Marginal note: Habakkuk.] namely, those restrained by the bit and bridle of true discipline, and by the power of the divine name, about which it is not permitted to speak at present.

To Asher, however, we shall assign Libra, whose regions are Bactriana, Caspiria, Syria, Thebais, Oaxis, and the Troglodytic region. Bactriana is enclosed by the Oxus river in the north and east; to the south, it borders the Arians, with the Caucasus mountains intervening; but to the north, by the Margians and Hyrcanians: and it is fertile in dromedaries and elephants, and quite rich in the abundance of other things: Moreover, it is celebrated for its Phraotes by Philostratus, and for Zoroaster by very many. Caspiria is not far from Bactriana, famous for its mountain and the Caspian Sea: whose inhabitants are exceedingly impious towards their parents, inasmuch as when they reach their seventieth

--- Page 779 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

...when they reach their seventieth year, they kill them with hunger and starvation. All Syria is bounded on the north by Cilicia and Amanus: towards the east by the Euphrates: to the south by happy Arabia: but on the west by the Egyptian and Cyprian sea, a region indeed renowned for much fertility. Thebais is between the Nile river and the Libyan mountains: After which the Oaxites extend as far as the Fountain of the Sun, and beyond. The Troglodytic region, however, extends in a line to the Arabian Gulf as far as Mount Elephant: The life of the inhabitants is pastoral, they have wives and children in common, except for those belonging to tyrants, who are found in great numbers among them: But if anyone corrupts the wives of these (tyrants), he is fined a sheep.

But let us see how much those things which the oracle relates concerning Asser (Asher) agree with these peoples: For Jacob says:
[Marginal note: Iahac.] Asher, his bread is fat, and he shall yield dainties to kings.
[Marginal note: Moses.] And Moses: Blessed be Asher with children; let him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil: his shoes shall be iron and brass; as the days of youth, so also old age. The fatness of food attributed to him refers to those regions which are fertile, and therefore peaceful among their brethren and fellow countrymen. But what is said: His shoes shall be iron and brass, refers to the Caspians, who are said to be cruel and impious towards their parents. But that the days of youth are equated with old age, indicates that those regions have undergone no, or few, changes, but have pursued the same customs through different times: For the same culture, character, and customs have existed among them almost always.

We shall indeed assign Naphtali to Sagittarius: whose regions are Tuscany, Colchis, Spain, and happy Arabia. Tuscany, between the Tyrrhenian Sea and the Tiber river, is filled with many noble and timely fruits, but easily deceptive. The Colchian region is between Iberia and the Euxine Sea, and bounded by the Caucasus mountain: and separated on the northern side by the Corante river from Asiatic Sarmatia: but on the west by the Moschian mountain, and bordering Trapezis: Also, from that part which is opposite the Sarmatian plains, there is a very dense forest of all kinds, especially with trees suitable for building ships. The deserts of another Arabia distinguish Happy Arabia from the north: on the east by the Persian Gulf: on the west by the Arabian (Gulf): on the south by the great sea, which is outside both gulfs: Indeed, it is happy with very many gums and perfumes, and so much opulence, that Alexander the Great was wonderfully delighted by it, as historians recall. But it was happier by the law given on Mount Si
[Marginal note: Paulus] nai, not without mystery, which the Apostle hints at, although he does not explain it, when he says: Sinai is a mountain in Arabia, joined to that which is now Jerusalem, which is our mother: For the words of the Apostle are deeper than they sound in voice.

Spain has the Sardinian Sea to the south, on the west the Atlantic as far as the north, on which side it is indeed wild and harmful: but on the south it is almost entirely most fertile and happy: Let us see if the eulogy of Naphtali suits these regions: For Jacob said: Naphtali is a hind let loose; he gives goodly words. But Moses says: Naphtali shall enjoy abundance, and be full of the blessings of the Lord: he shall possess the sea and the south: For the explanation of which passage

--- Page 780 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS.
                                                                                                        320
It is to be known that from the land of Naphtali were always reaped the first fruits, which as
first offerings were presented to the Lord: In which offering also pleasant
and beautiful praises were rendered to God. Therefore, Jacob says that he gives words of beauty,
with whom Moses says he enjoys abundance, and is full of blessings,
and possesses the sea and the south, that is, the super-celestial, from which comes all
blessing, generosity, and affluence: where also is the most hidden strength of the
most excellent stags, who are invoked in the Canticles: Therefore Jacob calls him a hind let
loose, because from there comes his strength and affluence: by which (affluence) the fertile region assigned to Naphtali,
providing more timely fruits than other regions, supplied first fruits to be offered to God:
and from there the most beautiful praises and beautiful words were rendered to him.
And Arabia Felix offers frankincense and perfumes, with which we are accustomed to render
solemn praises to God, and to direct prayers to Him along with the incense itself, so that of
it also it can be said: "It offers words of beauty." Tuscany and
Spain also produce timely fruits, especially that region of the latter which has the
Mediterranean Sea to the south, according to that Mosaic saying: "He shall possess the sea and the south." [Marginal note: Moses,]
Which, literally, I see no way it can be saved (or reconciled), although
some less skilled in the description of the world have said some inept things,
namely that the tribe itself had its lot by the Sea of Tiberias:
Which can by no means stand, since between that sea and the tribe of Naphtali lies the tribe of Issachar, and a certain arm of the tribe of Manasseh.
Nor are there lacking those who more ineptly say that the tribe itself had its
lot by the Tyrrhenian Sea, who rather make themselves laughable than refutable.
Nor can the text be verified concerning the Syrian Sea, since that (sea) has very little (coastline),
and this in the western region: For the tribe of Dan occupies that maritime area up to
the tribe of Simeon and Philistia. Therefore, the truth of the Mosaic oracle must be sought
elsewhere, since it cannot be found in the literal shell of the text. For according to the anagogical
sense, it has the super-mundane sea, and the true south, and the south wind blowing,
from which it receives abundant affluence and timely fruits. In our
allegorical sense, however, it signifies the Spanish region, which from the Pyrenees mountains to the
Pillars of Hercules enjoys that Sardinian Sea in the southern region, which is also more
fertile than the other regions of Spain: to these Spaniards, the oracle can also be
accommodated according to the letter and the etymology of the word, so that they may well be called
"hinds let loose," since they are very swift, agile, and slender, like stags, which also the
Chaldean interpretation indicates: For "Hispani" (Spaniards) are interpreted as "girded" or "expeditious."
They also give words of beauty, since their speech is wandering and charming,
perhaps from Jupiter and Sagittarius, as the Astrologers would say. [Marginal note: Astrologers.] We could adduce
many other things for the harmony of these matters, but these few suffice for discovering
rather than for well explaining such mysteries, since this is impossible:
For very many greater things than these are hidden, which partly we do not see, and
partly it is not permitted to utter.

--- Page 781 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

**Digression: why no particular tribe or region was assigned to Paul, the most famous apostle. Chapter XXI.**

[Large decorative initial E] And I deem it necessary to consider why it is recorded that no tribe, no family, or church, and no region was assigned to Paul, who labored more than others: But this (as I clearly demonstrate) was the reason: because to him was entrusted the care not only of one, but of all churches, as a universal pastor, or a general vessel chosen for the salvation of all nations, as he him-
[Marginal note: Paulus] self, speaking with the Corinthians, says: "My daily pressure, and the solicitude for all the churches." Just as also the royal Prophet, full of the Holy Spirit, sings in a triumphant
[Marginal note: Dauid] song, saying: "In the churches," namely the new ones collected from all tribes, "bless the Lord God from the springs of Israel," indeed from the twelve Apostolic springs, of which the twelve tribes bore the type, and their twelve springs of Elim. But because the figurative springs were going to fail, those representing them are rightly called defective: for Elim is interpreted as "failing." But the true and figurative springs by no means fail, but (the highest Truth bearing witness) from them flows water, and living springs gushing forth into eternal life, and continuously irrigating the regions entrusted to them. Therefore Peter was a spring, James was a spring, John was a spring; finally, all the Apostles were springs, each one irrigating his own family: But Paul, the most abundant spring of all, irrigated all. Hence follows the Prophet: "There," that is, in all those churches, "Benjamin, a young man in an ecstasy of mind," and caught up even to the third heaven, "and those lofty breasts, from which he drew milk and water, which he might offer to all the churches." Therefore all interpret this Benjamin as Paul, who was also descended from his family, and because what the oracle brings forth is verified concerning him word for word:
[Marginal note: Iahac.] for the patriarch Jacob says: "Benjamin is a ravenous wolf; in the morning he shall seize the prey, and in the evening he shall divide the spoils." He was indeed a plunderer in the beginning of his life, when he persecuted the church of God: but in the evening, growing old, he so divided
[Marginal note: Paulus] the food and spoils, that he said: "I have become all things to all people, that I might gain them for Christ." I also deem it necessary to observe the twofold name, suitable for both: For that last son of our Patriarch Jacob was first called Benoni, that is, "son of my sorrow," because his mother bore him in extreme sorrow: Afterwards by his father, he was named Benjamin, that is, "son of the right hand." Paul was no different, who at first was a son of sorrow to the church, while he fiercely persecuted it even to its utter destruction, if it had been permitted to him from above: But admonished by the voice of Christ, he was changed into another man, and became a true son of the right hand, while he, calling upon Him whose pro-
[Marginal note: idem.] per seat is at the right hand of God the Father, received Him with all his strength in the innermost parts of his heart, so that he no longer lived for himself, but rather for his guest, saying: "I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me." Nor did he then speak from himself, since
[Marginal note: idem.] Christ suggested the words to him, as he testifies elsewhere: "Do you seek proof of Christ who speaks in me?" Hence, not without mystery, Paul, now made a son of the right hand,
[Marginal note: Horati.] not only by painters, to whom, along with poets, "they dare anything"

--- Page 782 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 321

to him there was always equal power, but also in the seals of apostolic diplomas he is placed at the right hand of Peter. Nor do I think it should be supposed that blessed Sylvester and those ancient fathers, who were entirely vigilant in ecclesiastical discipline, allowed this order of such great princes to be by chance or without deliberation in the apostolic seals, but full of God, contemplating sacred mysteries, they intentionally placed him at the right hand who fought the wars of the Prince's right hand, who is Christ JESUS: And he was a very strenuous soldier, and laboring above all others, he enrolled countless fellow soldiers for his Emperor, whom he had gathered from diverse peoples, nations, and tribes: whence he was also called "doctor of the Gentiles" by the supreme Emperor: For he preached, as he himself says, the gospel of Christ where Christ was least named, as it is written: "Because those to whom it has not been announced concerning him, shall see: and those who have not heard [Marginal note: Isaiah.] concerning him, shall understand." Therefore, to carry the gospel to the Gentiles, he went to the Arabs, Greeks, Italians, Spaniards, and regions of diverse peoples, traversing a great part of the world, and finally with Peter, the prince of the apostles, he undertook the care of the universal church, favoring it by the power of the right hand of the divine word, just as Peter sustained it with the left hand of the judgment entrusted to him. Hence, the former is adorned with the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, while the latter is adorned with the keys of judgment, noble emblems: And embraced on both sides, they followed Christ, who always held the middle ground in the ecclesiastical kingdom, although coming forth from the Father's right hand, he returned there again: And because they were embraced in their pilgrimage, and together killed for Christ, they also reign together. There therefore Benjamin, in an ecstasy of mind, because elevated to heavenly things, he saw the secrets of God, which it is not lawful for a man to speak. And with this illustrious master of the army, not without mystery, are enumerated the princes of Judah, the princes of Zebulun, the princes of Naphtali, so that through these may be understood all princes and soldiers who fight against all kinds of troops of our enemies, which are reduced to a threefold battle line by John and by our wise men: For the prince of the army of faith and due submission against the battle line of pride is sung as Judah, who, interpreted as praise and confession, rules those who, confessing God with heart and mouth, acknowledge Him as Lord and teacher of all good things. But the prince of the troop of hope is called Zebulun, who signifies a dwelling place of fortitude, in which soldiers gathered and fortified by the protection of hope least fear the harshness and horror of war. But the prince of charity is Naphtali, who signifies dilatation, or more truly (as we touched upon above) equalization: for charity dilates the heart and all things, and equalizes all things: And this troop is raised against avarice, hatred, factions, and all things inimical to true peace, just as the bulwarks of hope are against enervating and soft wantonness. Therefore, under the great and distinguished leader Paul, and the supreme Emperor Christ, we all, a threefold troop, fight against the three-headed enemy, and that immense and dire Cerberus: Therefore, to Paul, as master of the entire army, not a particular but a universal church is assigned, just as to Peter, constituted judge by the supreme Prince, all jurisdiction of the Christian Commonwealth is entrusted.
ss

--- Page 783 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

What is signified by that intervening five-fold company in the encampment around the tabernacle of the covenant. Chapter 22.

[Marginal note: Numbers.]
**T**herefore, the encampment having been arranged around the tabernacle of the covenant or of summons, where the people were summoned to the divine oracle, we read in the Book of Numbers that five tents were placed between the tabernacle and those twelve tribes surrounding it: Of these, two belonged to Moses and Aaron, concerning whom it is said in the same place: "They shall encamp before the tabernacle of the covenant," that is, on the eastern side, Moses and Aaron with their sons, having custody of the sanctuary in the midst of the sons of Israel, so that whoever, being a stranger, approaches, shall die. Also, three other tents of the sons of Levi are commanded [to be placed] by three families, which are: the Kohathites to the south, the Merarites to the north, the Gershonites to the west: And all these with their assigned duties: over the chiefs of all of whom was Eleazar, son of Aaron. But the leader of the Kohathites was Elizaphan, and they took care of the vessels, namely, the table, mortars, bowls, candelabra, lamps, oil vessels: fire pans, flesh-hooks, tridents, hooks, pitchers, and such like: Moreover, also oil for preparing the lamps, and incense, and sacrifices. The Gershonites, whose leader was Eliasaph, guarded the curtains of the tabernacle, the roof, and the other covering, and especially the blue veil of the tent, which hung in the vestibule of the tabernacle of the covenant: Also the curtains of the court, and the veil that was before the tabernacle itself: as well as the cords, the vessels of ministry, and all things that pertained to the altar. But the Merarites, whose leader was Suriel, took charge of the assigned boards, the bars of the tabernacle, the pillars of the court all around with their bases, pegs, and ropes, and all the altar's furniture, just as the Gershonites [were responsible for] those things that pertained to erecting the altar itself: And they were chosen from the thirtieth year of age up to the fiftieth.

Which tabernacle, without doubt, prefigured that true tabernacle not made with hands, just as the Apostle, discoursing with the Hebrews, continues at length, saying:
[Marginal note: Paul.]
"For the first tabernacle was made, in which were the candelabra, the table, the showbread, which are called holy: But behind the second veil was the tabernacle, which is called the Holy of Holies, having a golden censer, and the ark of the covenant covered all around with gold: in which was a golden urn having manna, and Aaron's rod, which had budded, and the tablets of the covenant: above which were the Cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat, concerning which it is not necessary to speak in detail. But these things having been thus arranged, into the first tabernacle indeed the priests always entered, completing the offices of sacrifices, but into the latter only the High Priest, not without blood, which he would offer for his own and the whole people's ignorance: the Holy Spirit signifying this, that the way into the holiest was not yet made manifest, while the first tabernacle still had its standing. Which is a parable for the present time, according to which gifts and sacrifices were offered, which could not make perfect..."

--- Page 784 ---
**TONVS SEPTIMVS.** [Page number:] **322**

...which could not perfect the conscience of the worshiper, being concerned only with foods, drinks, and various washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed until the time of correction. But Christ, having come as High Priest of the good things to come, through a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made by human hands (that is, not of this creation), nor through the blood of goats or calves, but through His own blood, entered once for all into the holy places, having obtained eternal redemption. To discuss this tabernacle in detail will perhaps be considered rash, and rightly so, since the Apostle did not dare to do it; or he was unwilling, because he did not have initiated and perfect disciples to whom he might reveal the secrets of wisdom. But since it is given to us to behold the glory of the Lord with unveiled face, we shall consider it by no means rash to at least sketch something of this kind (with the Holy Spirit as guide). Therefore, that typical tabernacle was in the midst of the camps and figurative tribes, signifying the true tabernacle not made by human hands, that is, not of this creation, but produced by a more blessed generation, which is Christ Jesus, erected in the midst of the true tribes and camps of this entire universe, according to that prophetic saying: "He has worked salvation in the midst of the earth." For Jerusalem, where propitiation was found, is in the middle of the world, near the supercelestial temple, as more recondite theologians assert. And it is (if we follow the astronomers) in the angle of the southern triangle, near that true south, of which Habakkuk says: "God will come from the south." [Marginal note:] Abacuc. To which region God is also said to have walked when He wished to succor the first parent and cover his sin with a garment of skins made from the hide of that Lamb who bore the sins of the world: For from that region He bestowed all gifts of grace upon us: for there He was born, there He taught, there He suffered, and there He rose, and from there He ascended to that true south and supernal temple, from where He gave gifts to men, and from where all mercy, grace, and salvation [come]: According to which all companies and camps ought to direct their banner and their face, so that their countenance and prayer may be directed there, from where benefits are hoped to be received: Therefore, this tabernacle was erected in the middle of both worlds, so that He who is said to hold the middle on the supramundane throne may reign everywhere in the house of Jacob: and here below He took possession of the middle of the habitable earth. Thus also Christ, the true tabernacle, just as He always held the middle in being born, teaching, appearing, and dying, so reigning in the midst of the house of Jacob, He sits as the true Israel, that is, the heir or prince of God. Therefore, to this true heir and prince of God, who conquered the principality of the world with the trophy of the cross erected in the middle of the world, all tribes and families serving God look, drawn into that sacred dodecad (twelve), three for each part of heaven: for each of which (as John testifies) [Marginal note:] Iohan. three gates lie open to the heavenly kingdom. Very beautifully and most mysteriously also, that typical tabernacle is described as bipartite, so that it might signify the true biform tabernacle: where human nature is found first, and
SS ij

--- Page 785 ---
OF THE SECOND CANTICLE

CHRIST himself is called holy, because he was anointed with the holy oil of divinity above all his princes, and illuminated by the light of that lampstand, which says: "I am the light of the world." And there are also found the showbread, Christ also affirming this, for he says: "He will go in and go out, and everywhere he will find pasture." For Christ himself, as man, is the true prince of faces, through whom we are introduced to the face of divinity. Therefore, into these holy places, all who sacrifice and meditate enter at will, because the meditation of man and his work is easy. But into the Holy of Holies (which is the divine nature enclosed in the human, from which propitiation and salvation are properly expected), the great priest, and not a common one, enters; because only one who is perfect, and who has consecrated himself most excellently to God, enters the divine inner sanctum. He enters indeed once a year, when, renewed and transformed for the better, he gathers new and annual fruits, as if a well-cultivated other world; and these are always so much better, the more he is separated from subdued flesh and almost extinct blood. Therefore, he is said not to enter without blood, by which, progressing, he is always purified, until, with it completely extinguished, he merits to become a son of God according to the power delivered by the Word. But there is a great difference between the typical and the true tabernacle: for there, the blood of animals only atoned for the ignorance of the priest and the people; but here, in the blood of Christ, all sins are purged, provided they have not been perpetrated against the Holy Spirit, which are forgiven neither in this age nor in the future. And so, entering, he finds the golden censer, that is, the vessel of prayer enriched by perfect charity. There, the ark of the covenant, namely, perfect understanding of scripture, which is given to true priests, and to those who, well purified, have attained understanding and merit to see God. They also receive that most sweet and hidden manna, which no one knows except he who receives it. Moreover, he finds the rod, that is, the priestly virtue blossoming and always progressing for the better. He also beholds the tablets of the covenant inscribed by the finger of God at will, because he finds engraved in his heart the love of God and of his neighbor, to which, as to two principal engravings, the whole law and the prophets are reduced. Finally, there he beholds the cherubim of glory, through whom shine (as we touched upon above) all created things, bipartite into a celestial and terrestrial structure, above which sits he from whom all propitiation emanates. But between this tabernacle and the twelve tribes surrounding it, which comprise the entire host of God's soldiers, five particular and separate companies are said to lie between, not without mystery, in as many tents: Which (to set aside the anagogical sense for now) in the Church of God (if I am not mistaken) signify five approved ranks of priests, leaders, Levites, and mediators between God himself, who was said to reside in the tabernacle, and the people of God gathered and described by those twelve companies. And these are the colleges of Peter, Augustine, Benedict, Basil, and Francis, to which all other companies of particular ministers of God are reduced, or from them as from prin-

--- Page 786 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 323

...from the principal trunks, as it were, certain branchlets sprout forth. Therefore, the first two tents were of Moses and Aaron together: to which correspond the colleges of Peter and Augustine, both of whom are called Canons: But these are regulated, and more ready to handle those sacred matters, provided they observe the institutions handed down by their father Augustine: handed down, I say, not to perfect the religion of Peter, nay, of Christ, but to bring these back to those ancient customs; in which that apostolic assembly had been trained: with whom the authority of judging always rested, just as with Moses, who also possessed the first place in that group of five. But the three following, the multitude of Levites, who are the Kohathites, Merarites, and Gershonites, signify three other assemblies of regulated (orders): For the Kohathites, who are interpreted as "those who grieve," represent the troops of Benedict, who, obscure and always squalid, seem dedicated to continuous mourning for sins and the death of Christ: Hence to them were entrusted mortars, that is, vessels in which sins are crushed, censers for the fumigation of prayers, and bowls, by which heavenly things are tasted: Moreover, candelabra, and lamps of readings, and of heavenly lights: Also vessels of the oil of mercy, by which they always pity others, and receptacles of fires, and of the flames of the Holy Spirit. Also small forks, tridents, hooks, shovels, and such things, by which the fire of fervor and love may be stirred up. But all these things were believed to be entrusted to them clothed in hyacinthine and celestial color, since they ought always to be intent on heavenly things by continuous contemplation, in act or in virtue, so that they may observe that evangelical saying: "One ought always to pray, and never give up." [Marginal note: CHRI-] The Merarites, who signify "those who are embittered" or "those who cover watches," represent the family of Basil and the Anchorites, who, with a certain most severe austerity in solitary life, intent on continuous vigils, made themselves hard and bitter to themselves, so that they might be an example of evangelical mourning to others: To whom, deservedly, as to most robust men, all the strong things were entrusted: columns, bases, bars, planks, and such monuments of the tabernacle: But alas, it is to be lamented, it is no wonder if we have seen the tabernacle for the most part ruined, because it has neither Pauls, nor Peters, nor Macarii, nor Antonies, nor Hilarions, nor such as these, who might sustain the tabernacle itself with sanctity, doctrine, miracles, and example. [Marginal note: STVS.] But the Gershonites, whom they interpret as "strangers" or "outcasts," represent the poor men of the Gospel, to whom it is commanded that they should lead their lives precisely according to the measure of the Gospel, and be strangers and pilgrims in this world: and live entirely separated and cast out from it, so that they may say with the Apostle: "To me the world has been crucified, and I to the world." To these were entrusted the curtains of the tabernacle, the curtains of the courtyard, the coverings, the roofs, the trials, and all things which pertained to covering the sacred things, so that they might nevertheless reveal and uncover the secrets at the time appointed by the Supreme Father. Meanwhile, some have preceded these, who have given forth certain flashes of the immense light hidden in the tabernacle, as can be clear to those who have read the Scotists, Maronites, Halesians, Ockhamists, Bibracenses, and such like. To them also was committed the hyacinthine and celestial veil.
SS iij

--- Page 787 ---
CANTICLE II

through which the entrance to the tabernacle was open, and also entrusted were the cords: And although I cannot explain these without incurring much envy, I will not, however, cease to explain them at least in part: For through these heavenly men, it is manifest how many and to whom the entrance to the true tabernacle was and is open, and they are bound by the cords of Seraphic love and charity, in which the supreme inhabitant of the tabernacle draws to himself those whom he has chosen, Also entrusted were vessels, with which they might, together with their colleagues, taste heavenly things: which they accomplish all the more, the more perfectly they are initiated into evangelical institutions. And would that they themselves and their fellow soldiers would apply all their zeal and effort, that by these evangelical teachings they might, as they ought, purify and cleanse themselves, so that that evangelical saying might have its place:
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] You are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you.

What the seventy-two disciples signify, whom our prince JESUS is said to have chosen in the Gospel. Chapter XXIII.

[Large decorative initial V containing figures of people]
Beyond the group of twelve and five, about which we have already discussed, those who were privy to divine secrets assert that Christ JESUS, the Lord of all things and nations, chose seventy-two disciples, this indeed, so that both the typical and evangelical family might in part agree with the whole supreme world; nor less with our tabernacle, which itself also bears the image of the world: For in the figurative and legal family, not only the number twelve and five are found, but also seventy-two princes were commanded by the Lord to be chosen, so that it might itself bear a perfect image of heavenly things, where the twelve signs, seventy-two princes, and that sacred quinary are found, to whose goal God acts familiarly with us, and in that very thing denoted by the last letter of the great four-letter name (as more secret theologians assert) the supreme craftsman fashioned the world. But those seventy-two princes are distributed in the heavens in such a way that six are said to preside over each sign, and over seventy-two languages: from which is gathered that very great multitude of the elect, which no one can number. And it is very well gathered from the seventy-two, which number is derived from the first perfect senary and from the first increasing duodenary, so that this family, gathered from every nation that is under heaven, may be understood as perfect and superabundant: which most full sacrament is found more happily than in heaven and in the figurative [family], in the kingdom and family of Christ, to whom all power in heaven and on earth has been given: Which mystical body under Christ, the perfect head, is also perfected with all fullness, just as this natural body, and human tabernacle, is made up of seventy-two joints and as many articulations: of which twelve principal ones are in the arms and legs: For in each arm there are three joints: one at the shoulder blade, a second at the elbow, a third at the hands; which combined yield six. Again three in each leg: one at the thigh, a second at the knee, a third at the ankle; which are indeed as many as in the arms, and when calculated together, constitute twelve. Again three

--- Page 788 ---
TONVS SEPTIMVS. 324

joints are in each finger of the hands, from which thirty joints result from these ten fingers, and as many in the ten toes of the feet, which all combined together constitute sixty, and together with those twelve major ones, they make seventy-two: Nor should anyone object by that which is commanded in the book of Nu- [Marginal note: Nume.] mbers, that only seventy should be gathered, to whom the spirit of Moses should be imparted: For even there the number seventy-two is found, if those two are counted together, who, filled with the same spirit (as we read there), prophesied in the camp, who therefore were not counted with the others, because (as Rabbi Solomon says) they did not receive a written lot: Or (as it pleases others) Moses and Aaron were counted with those seventy, so that an equal portion of six from [Marginal note: Ra. Sa.] each tribe might be collected. Nor is it surprising if Moses and Aaron were sometimes counted with the others, but sometimes not at all, since this happened in the new family to Paul, and in the old to Ephraim and Manasseh, and others, not without mystery. Therefore, from these twelve principal and from all seventy-two manifest joints, which Christ wished to have in his mystical body, it is easily conjectured that he also chose all other members of the body, and every most minute and hidden part, so that that body might rejoice in perfect integrity: From which also the hairs, and whatever hairs of the human body (as Origen [Marginal note: Orige.] rightly thinks) represent something in the mystical body, which the creator of the universe joined together with no less diligence than he originally fashioned the quickly dissolving tabernacle of man, since he loves this spiritual body, glued together with his own blood, far more than that which was fashioned from the dust of the earth.

That Christ rules and governs the whole mystical and worldly body. Chapter XXIII.

**F**ormed therefore, the mystical body itself, from all the elect unto life, as if from great and small members, it is fitting that he who is the life and resurrection of all should vivify his whole body and all its members, just as the particular soul vivifies the body which it informs, and all its members. This also must be observed, that the soul not only vivifies the body, but rules and moderates the whole of it, and all its parts: No less is Christ the moderator and ruler of his body: Therefore [Marginal note: Paulus.] Paul calls him not only life, but also the head of this catholic body, saying to the Colossians: He is the head of the body of the church. Nor is he only the ruler of this mystical body, but also of the whole worldly body, just as it itself was fashioned through the word that lies hidden in Christ, so that he may protest [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] and say not without cause: All power has been given to me in heaven and on earth: It was certainly given [Marginal note: Sapien.] by him, to whom it is said in the book of Wisdom: But you, Father, govern all things from the beginning by your providence. And this with the sweetest harmony, as was stated above: But you judge all things with tranquility, although sometimes none, and

SS iiij

--- Page 789 ---
                        OF THE SECOND CANTICLE

Sometimes, to us who are blind, the governance of the world may seem horrible. For it
leaves nothing disordered, but binds all things with their own orders, just as it knows
[Marginal note: Ecclesiasticus.] even the most minute things, as that Wise One, whoever he may be, testifies saying: Who has counted the sand of the sea, the drops of rain, and the days of the world? Who has measured the height of heaven, and the breadth of the earth? And explaining this, he added: There is one almighty creator of all, most high and powerful king, and greatly to be feared:
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] who, just as he numbers, so also he orders, moderates, and cares, as he declares, who received power from the same Father, when he says: Look at the birds of the air, for they neither sow nor reap nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not of more value than they, O you of little faith? And descending even to the most minute
[Marginal note: The Same.] herbs, he says: Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow: they neither toil nor spin: But I say to you, that not even Solomon in all his glory was clothed like one of these, because these are adorned with natural and living color: but the garments of Solomon were painted with artificial and dead color. Therefore, the grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is thrown into the oven. God so clothes and cares, that nothing unknown, nothing disordered is left by him in
[Marginal note: Plato.] the universe. Here the divine Plato says: No place is unknown to the immortal God, nothing is unexplored by him, for whether you remain here, or descend into the deepest caverns of the earth, or seek any other refuge and hiding place, you will in vain be able to hide from that divine and ever-watchful eye, nor escape the punishments justly due to you.
[Marginal note: David.] Who perhaps had learned from him who sang: Where shall I go from your spirit? Or where shall I flee from your presence? If I ascend to heaven, you are there; if I descend to hell, you are present. If I take my wings in the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there your hand shall lead me, and your right hand shall hold me. And I said: Perhaps the darkness will hide me: but the darkness will not be dark to you: nor is any bone hidden from you, although you have covered it in various ways: Your eyes also saw my unformed substance.
[Marginal note: Orpheus.] To whom Orpheus assents, saying: The perfect eye of God, and the mind of Jove, inspects all things whatsoever happen among us. And again in the hymn to Apollo: You have the boundaries of the whole universe: the beginning is your care.

--- Page 790 ---
**TONE SEVEN.**
**325**

Moreover, diligently how He preserves what He has built. Why then should anyone think that God, in creating living beings and the other parts of the world, did not foresee beforehand where all things were to be placed before they came into being, and does not see how all these same things are preserved in their proper places? Therefore, He who knows all things does not ignore: Nor is He powerless to rule: He who could make all things: Nor does He refuse or disdain to govern those things which He has made, whether they be nobler or viler. Therefore, no doubt about this providence remains for the wise, who know the divine nature to be wise, best, and most powerful. Nor does the governor of the universe himself have providence only by a certain general governance, as some assert, because if he protects and cares for the whole, it is necessary that he also consult for the parts: For nature is so constituted that well-being in the universe cannot exist unless the parts are also rightly disposed: For neither a physician, nor a ship's captain, nor an army general, nor a head of a household, nor a ruler and governor of the Republic, nor any craftsman, whoever he may be, cares in such a way that he manages the more important things and despises the lesser, but each is then considered to perform his duty when he applies himself to individual things with study and diligence, as the nature of each demands. But if men do not even overlook the lesser things, certainly God is not to be thought to neglect even the smallest things, and much less does He despise man, whom He has placed over all living beings. Therefore, He is that supreme Father who knows all things, numbers all things, measures all things, and cares for all things with a special governance: which governance He also committed to the Son as a legitimate heir after the triumph over the tyrant. Therefore, He rules all these same things with wisdom and power handed down from the Father. But many are disturbed by those things which seem to happen out of order, and are not worthy of such great governance: For evils arise everywhere, which ought not to happen under God's rule, since evils cannot come from God, as not only our own people assert, but also Plato shows in the third book of the Republic. [Marginal note: Plato.] And so that we may omit other things which seem to deviate from the order of nature and good governance, we will run through some things concerning the world's overseer, whether he governs badly: For these things have so struck even the wise and principal heroes in God's kingdom, that they seem to break out with a certain impatience even against God himself, the governor. "I will cry out (says Habakkuk) suffering violence, and you will not save? [Marginal note: Abacuc.] Why have you shown me iniquity and toil, to see plunder and injustice against me? Why do you look upon the scorners, and are silent when the wicked trample on one more righteous than himself?" And the royal Prophet says: "But my feet were almost moved, my steps were almost poured out, because I was jealous of the wicked, seeing the peace of sinners, [Marginal note: Dauid.] because there is no regard for their death, and no strength in their wound: They are not in the toil of men, and they will not be scourged with men: Therefore, pride held them, by which, namely, from undue success, they broke out against God and men." Nor do Jeremiah, [Marginal note: Ieremie.] Augustine, Jerome, and many other household members of God complain less about such things: [Marginal notes: August. Hiero.] to whom we could always say that among the Greeks [Marginal note: August.]

**ss v**

--- Page 791 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

...venerable sentiment, and exceedingly celebrated by Augustine in the book "On the Quantity of the Soul":
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] "Do not seek what is above you; for these things are counted among those about which the Savior says: 'I confess to you, Father, because you have hidden these things from the wise and the prudent.'" And this is (as some assert)
[Marginal note: Moses.] that glory of God's just and equitable rule, about which Moses said: "Show me your glory," that is, how you conduct yourself in this rule, so that I may be able to give you glory, and defend that glory from detractors. To him God said:
[Marginal note: GOD.] "You will not see my face"—that is, the reason why I do this—"but you will see my back parts"—that is, my deeds and effects. And this is what the royal
[Marginal note: David.] prophet himself continues, saying: "I thought to understand this, but it was a toil before me, until I entered the sanctuary of God, and understood their latter end." Which latter end is when, after all the merits of individuals have been examined, each one will be rendered according to their works. But in the meantime, this is what we must always sing:
[Marginal note: The same.] "You are just, O Lord, and your judgment is right." For here that wisdom, which knows how to extract good from every evil, also knows how to adapt all things that seem crooked to the right use of those things it governs, just as
[Marginal note: August.] Augustine exemplifies concerning a carpenter, for whom crooked and complex tools are opportune and necessary no less than straight ones. Another point also arises, which particularly pertains to Christ, to whom the power of ruling has been given, and that is: "Since he himself came for the salvation of all, why is his doctrine and redemption rejected by so many? And why does he permit his vineyard to be destroyed by all who pass by the way, and to be devoured by the singular beast and tyrant of this world, whom he already boasts of having cast out?
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] And why did he preach more in Chorazin and Bethsaida than in Tyre and Sidon, when he himself threatens and says: 'Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented in sackcloth and ashes.' Why also does he pour out greater charisms more in one place and nation than in another? And if he can provide for all, why (as he himself foretold) did he permit very many false prophets and false apostles and false Christs to arise and lead many astray?" To these questions, we will answer, saying: "Because just as in a body well regulated by any soul, humors are often altered from diverse causes, and if the powerful virtue of the soul resists them, the body is preserved strong, although it is altered in some part and in some way (for it cannot be that a body subject to alteration and corruption should not be altered); in the same way, in such a great body of the Church, composed of pilgrims still warring and subject to various defects, it cannot be (unless the pilgrims were impeccable, which, as they say, involves a contradiction in terms) that some should not be altered, although the members are vivified by Christ with true and powerful life, and he is the salvation of all the infirm, who does not cease to succor them in their weakness of virtue, those whom he commanded in his stadium

--- Page 792 ---
**TONE SEVEN.**
326

to fight willingly: but he awaits the time predetermined by the Father, concerning which the Apostle, being taught, says: "Death is swallowed up in victory," achieved namely by the power of Christ; which a little earlier he had more clearly explained saying: "The last enemy to be destroyed is death," from which, namely, comes all infirmity of the soul, for he has put all things under his feet. The Father indeed subjected them, who is beyond all things that he subjected; to whom only the Son is subjected, but he (the Son) dominates over the others, and prevails against all those things, when he wills. Nor can the wall be destroyed to the ruin of the vineyard and of faith itself, [Marginal note: CHRIST.] since Truth itself, infallible, says: "I have prayed for you, Peter, that your faith may not fail," that is, the body of the Church vivified by me, which I entrusted to you, Peter. And why was the word of God not preached in Tyre and Sidon more than in Chorazin and Bethsaida, says Origen: "Because perhaps [Marginal note: Origen.] they would not have stood firm." But a weak answer needs support: for just as for redeeming the entire human race he awaited that time, concerning which the Apostle [Marginal note: Paul.] says: "But when the fullness of time came, God sent his Son," so for the conversion of Tyre [Marginal note: Acts of the Apostles.] he awaited the fullness of that time, concerning which it is said in the Acts of the Apostles: "When Paul had come to Tyre, he stayed there seven days; and when these were completed, the Tyrians with their wives and children joined Paul. And he himself with his companions, kneeling on the shore, prayed for them and their faith." In the same way it must be said concerning any others: because he awaited, and awaits, the times which the Father has placed in his own power, and which it is not for us to know. Also, greater charisms are diffused into greater and nobler members, just as in the body, nature regulating, purer blood is sent to the heart, and purer spirits are distributed to the brain and nobler members: for the Spirit of Christ divides his gifts to each one, as he wills and as is fitting. To these members, endowed according to their own virtue, he permits various enemies to attack us with strength, cunning, deceit, ambushes, and importunity, so that the triumph of those who conquer may be more glorious in the power of him of whom it is said: "But thanks be to God, who gives [Marginal note: Paul.] us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ."

The explanation of this through an oracle. Chapter XXV.

<div style="font-size: 200%; float: left; margin-right: 0.1em;">D</div>E this dominion to be given by the Father to our Redeemer Christ, there exists a wonderful and indeed, to those who understand, a very clear oracle, where also the time when it will be given is secretly hinted at: For God speaks to David, the chief father and true type of Christ, saying in the second book of Kings and in the first book of Chronicles: [Marginal note: Kings, Chronicles.] "When your days are fulfilled, and you rest with your fathers, I will raise up your seed after you, which will come forth from your womb, or your intestines"; inasmuch as in Hebrew it has ממעיך *mimeheca*, which means "from your intestines." Therefore it cannot refer to the father, but to the mother, from whose intestines Christ came forth. For a child does not come forth from the intestines, but from the loins and the paternal rod. So therefore, to denote the true king to be born of a woman alone, who was the daughter,

--- Page 793 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

And David himself, notably said that seed, from which the true king would be born, would come forth from the intestines. The oracle continues: "And I will establish his kingdom:" Which cannot be understood of Solomon, because while he was still alive, the Lord through Ahijah the Shilonite promised it to the ten tribes of Jeroboam, which He also gave into his dominion. It continues: "He shall build a house for my name:" indeed the true house of Israel, prefigured by that typical one which preceded it. And this is that house of which [Marginal note: Gabriel.] the heavenly messenger to the mother said: "And he shall reign over the house of Jacob forever," as we have explained above. It continues: "And I will establish his throne forever," Behold how clearly this excludes the kingdom of Solomon, which quickly failed. Therefore, it speaks of the kingdom of Him who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Of whom David himself sings in the forty-fourth hymn of the entire alphabetical series, saying under the letter Mem, מלכותך Malcuteca, that is, "Thy kingdom is a kingdom of all ages:"

"I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son:" Which cannot be understood except of Him who said through the mouth of the prophet, to whom the promise concerning Him was made. [Marginal note: Psal.] "The Lord said to me, 'You are my son; today I have begotten you.'" How then that [phrase] "When your days are fulfilled" is to be understood, we will explain, as much as the Lord permits. For the days appointed for each person from the beginning (as we have in the more secret Theology of the Hebrews) are a thousand years, to which term, although some approached it, like Adam, Methuselah, and others, none however completed it, due to the exigency of the sin of the protoplast. And from the flood, because of the common sins inflicted upon the human race, the term was contracted to one hundred and twenty [Marginal note: Gene.] years, as we read in Genesis according to the common interpretation, although the oracle hints at something else, nor is it properly verified in this sense, since Abraham lived 175 years, Isaac 180, Jacob 137. But if anyone were to reach the term appointed from the beginning, he would attain to the thousandth year, according to which term the Lord spoke to David: For from the creation of the world until Christ were 3784 years. But from the creation of the world until the death of David were 2880 years. Therefore, from the death of David until Christ were 906 years. As is clear to anyone calculating: Add 70 years of David's life, and it will be 976. Add again the number of the letters of David's name, as it is written in Chronicles, namely with a Yod, thus דויד: For in the books of Kings it is written without a Yod, thus דוד, all these things not without mystery. That name, therefore, thus written, gives 24. Which number, if added to the previous number, makes exactly a thousand: which number is that of a complete age, [Marginal notes: Iohan. Pytha.] as we have said. Nor should anyone wonder if the number of the name is added, because unless some mystery lay hidden there, John would not have said in the Apocalypse: "Let him who has understanding calculate the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man." Pythagoreans also professed to prognosticate many things through the numbers of names. Therefore, to this number twenty-four, which is made up of a double twelve, if the number of years he lived and the years that flowed from his death until Christ are added, the perfect course of a man's life is completed:

--- Page 794 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 327**

And again, in the calculation of numbers, which resulted from certain words of the oracle, that complete millennium is obtained with the years of the Messiah's life, which words are these: כי ימלאו ימיך ושכבת "When your days are fulfilled, and you lie down (sleep) etc." The calculation of those letters is exactly 1035, which is the number of years from the day of David's conception until the death of Christ: For beyond those thousand years, Christ lived thirty-three and a half (years): And if nine months are taken, during which David was in his mother's womb, and nine months of Christ himself, they give a year and a half: which time, added to those thirty-three and a half years, makes the thirty-fifth. Nor should anyone wonder why Christ, the most perfect of all men, did not reach those thousand years, the full course of human life: For Christ, as the new man, gave a beginning to a new life and new laws: For the first man was from the earth, earthy; the second man from heaven, heavenly, completed a new course of life, which is by no means to be explained here. To which words of the oracle, to pursue our purpose, David, responding to God, full of many mysteries, says: "This is not from my merits, namely, but because it seemed good in your eyes, O Lord God, that you should speak concerning the house of your servant from afar: For this is the law of Adam, O Lord God:" The mysteries of these words are not perceived, except in the Hebrew characters, which are עבדך למרחוק וזאת תורת האדם אדני. The extreme (last) letters of these words are כקתת סי with ל which is a word by itself, the calculated number of which is undoubtedly a thousand. This method of calculating by the last, or first, letters of words is very common among the Hebrews: And with ת (tav) removed from תורת (Torat), there remains תור (Tor), which, when calculated, gives 606. This number is also given by the letters of the name Jesus, & Mary ישו מרים, as is clear to one who knows. And this the true law of man made, that just as through man we had lost all good things, so through man we might recover all good things, according to that of Paul: "For since by man came death, and by man came also the resurrection of the dead."

--- Page 795 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

CHRIST is the mediator, through whom passage is given to all, so that they may reach their end. Eighth Tone.

CHRIST in the most holy Trinity is the middle person. Chapter I.
Christ is the true tree placed in the middle of paradise. Chapter II.
What this divine middle person has with human nature,
which he assumed. Chapter III.
How from that tree sin and evil were introduced into the world. Chapter IV.
Christ in this life was always delighted by moderation. Chapter V.
Christ was the best mediator. Chapter VI.
Through Christ, man, we ascend to God and the Father. Chapter VII.
How, according to the Apostle's teaching, Christ is the mediator of the New Testament. Chapter VIII.
Digression concerning the war declared by the ancient Fathers against those peoples. Chapter IX.
Whether we need a means, so that we may come to this Christ the mediator. Chapter X.

--- Page 796 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 328**
**CHRIST IN THE MOST HOLY TRINITY**
**is the middle person. Chapter One.**

[Large decorative initial O] All who speak of the Trinity easily agree that the Son, and the Word which was made flesh, and named JESUS, and Christ in Greek, and Messiah in Hebrew, but Anointed in Latin, holds the middle place among the persons of that most holy Trinity: in which the Father is the first root of all emanations, both in divine and in created things: And the Holy Spirit is produced by the Father and the Son, and produces nothing in that most holy Trinity: The Son is also the middle person, produced indeed by the Father, and at the same time producing the Holy Spirit with Him by an eternal emanation: This doctrine is professed not only by all Christians, but also by the more secret Theologians of the Hebrews, who teach that חכמה *hochma*, which signifies wisdom, ema- [Thehe.] nates from the supreme fount, or springs from the super-excellent root, which they call כתר עליון *keterhaliona*; from which two founts, or from the first fount and the light proceeding from it, that third is produced which they call בינה *bina*, which we, properly interpreting, can call prudence or understanding: Indeed, that understanding of which it is said in Ecclesiasticus: "And [Ecclesi.] with the spirit of understanding he will fill him": Understanding is indeed a degree of knowledge more proximate to us than wisdom, which is attributed to the Son: and therefore more easily graspable by us: Therefore the Son said: "I have many things to say to you, [CHRIST.] but you cannot bear them now," because, namely, you are not able to endure the splendor of my wisdom: "But when that spirit of truth comes, he will teach you all things, and will suggest to you all things whatsoever I shall have said to you, at a certain lower degree than these things are to be taught in me": For no one knows the Son, properly speaking, except the Father: But at a certain lower degree, He also offers Himself to us to be seen, according to what He said: "He who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him: And I will manifest myself to him." And sometimes He also manifests the Father through Himself, according to what He says: "He who sees me, sees also my Father," a person indeed more sublime than all of us, since He is therefore more remote from our grasp: The Holy Spirit, however, is more familiar to us: but the Son is the middle between both. And although God is a circle, and a certain intellectual sphere, whose center, that is, everything created, is everywhere, nevertheless, under the aspect of persons, we express them not by a circle, but by number, saying: First, second, and third, or last person, beyond which no production of persons in divine things is given: But in that middle [person], as in a certain house, all things are placed by vital ideas: Whence, just as that middle person was the medium through which all things emanated from the Father, so also it is the medium through which the Father

--- Page 797 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

we know: For who will be able to come to His knowledge, unless the Son wishes to reveal it to him. But that the emanation from the Father occurs through the Son, who is the second person in divine matters, Iamblichus hints,
[Marginal note: Iambli.] while discussing such things through numbers, saying: Unity exists as the cause of identity and union; but the binary is the provider of distinction and progress; but the ternary is the guide for the return of those things which have proceeded. Therefore, referring to these things which have been said, the first and unique is the Father: But the Second, or Binary, is the Son, through whom all things were made: whence He is the cause of distinction and progress: But the Third, which completes that Trinity, is the Holy Spirit, who, hovering over the waters, provides forms to all, and grants favor, so that they may be led back to the first, yet through that same (thing) by which they had been dispersed.

Christ is the true tree placed in the midst of paradise. [Marginal note: Cap. II.] Chapter II.

[Large decorative initial E] ND so that it may be clearly signified that the Son, who is Christ, claims the middle as something peculiar to Himself, when the series of intellectual things was discussed by Moses under the metaphor of a garden and trees, he describes the tree of life planted in the midst of that garden, which, without doubt, is Christ, who is called the bread of life, the tree of life, and life itself. But it was planted in the middle, so that each person might more easily receive from the fullness of its life according to his capacity. Hence also, when the fullness of time came, this tree was grafted into the tree of assumed nature in the very center of the world, so that it might distribute its fruits to all around in due proportion: Concerning which grafting, James says: "Receive the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls." And this tree of life, namely the divine person grafted into human nature, is the tree of the knowledge of good and evil: because He alone (as we said elsewhere), being a wayfarer, experienced the good of blessedness and the evil of human passions. Moreover, He is the tree of good and evil, because He, above others, knew how to discern good from evil,
[Marginal note: Isaias.] according to that prophecy of Isaiah: "He shall eat butter and honey, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good." Nor did He only know, but He also taught us to know true goods, which we ought to love, and true evils to be feared and avoided by us. Finally, He is the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, to whom judgment and the knowledge of discerning good and evil were given: Whence, as He Himself testifies in the Gospel, when He comes to the universal judgment, He will place the good on the right, but the evil on the left, standing Himself in the middle, and separating these from those by perpetual segregation. But this tree was therefore forbidden from the beginning, that it should not be touched, or tested, or eaten from, because no one ought to experience or test the law and judgment existing in Him, but to revere and fear, and always have before their eyes, so that we might direct all our actions towards its goal: In which sense we do not doubt that that saying of the living God was spoken: "These words, which I command you today, shall be in your heart: and you shall tell them to your children, and you shall meditate on them sitting in your house, and walking on the way,"

--- Page 798 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 329**

sleeping, and rising, and you shall bind them as a sign on your hand, and they shall be
before your eyes: Which is also said in the Psalm: Blessed is the man who [Marginal note: Psalm.]
meditates on the law of the Lord day and night. And most excellently is this tree of the law and rule of the divine
word said to be of the knowledge of good and evil, because from it we can discern what is right, what is wrong,
what is good, and what is evil. For this teaches
us when we ought to enjoy the supreme good: and when, or how, we may lawfully
possess the lowest or the middle good. And with that tree and rule preserved unharmed, then we
can eat from all trees, that is, delight in all creatures, and desire them with an appetite in no way distorted. Let these things be said for those
which pertain to the moral sense, for in the allegorical and higher sense we have
interpreted them elsewhere.

Concerning this divine middle person and the human nature he assumed. Chapter III.

<span style="font-size: 200%; line-height: 0.5;">N</span>or without mystery did that middle person in the most holy Trinity assume
human nature: because He Himself is also a medium between heaven
and earth: a medium between God and other creatures, understanding the
nature of both, so that through that middle nature He might unite all
extremes: For human nature itself, possessing the middle, exists as the bond of all things:
and having a part with all things, it delights in all things: For the good, in
which there is delight, apprehends the whole breadth of things, into which no
creature is carried except man: For the supreme ruler assigned to each
its own food, but to man, all kinds: which Moses indicates with his enigmas: [Marginal note: Moses]
Firstly, when he granted to man existing in the paradise of delights every tree
for food: although he had already granted this before, man not yet being
placed in paradise, when he said: Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed
upon the earth, and all trees which have in themselves the seed of their kind,
that they may be for you as food: But to all living creatures I have given the green herb,
only, that is. Behold, that not the same law of foods is prescribed for beasts and for men:
Indeed, with beasts left to their green herbs, to man are granted not only edible herbs, but sometimes living creatures. And for man
placed in the paradise of delight, every tree, that is, the vigor
and delight of all rational creatures, is granted as food, and also the tree of life, which was in the midst of
paradise: Whence we have how man, a creature mediating between God and other created things,
can delight both in God Himself and in all created things: For we were
produced for the purpose of enjoying God Himself, if Augustine and the whole crowd of Theologians [Marginal note: Augusti.]
think correctly: and until we attain the fruition of God Himself and union with Him,
we can possess all creatures, the right law being observed: For we
possess the earth, which we tread upon, and which provides us with food and a stable foundation for constructing buildings: In water we navigate, we wash what needs cleansing;

TT

--- Page 799 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI
SECOND CANTICLE

& in many opportune [ways] we use them: We also enjoy the air, by which we breathe,
and through which we perform the function of our eyes: We also live by fiery and warming
power, and we accomplish things to be cooked and purified. We feed on
plants and the flesh of animals: of which we are also clothed with their hair and skins, and
by their favor we cultivate the earth, we transport heavy burdens, and we
conveniently traverse long journeys, even when weak. From the heavens also we receive great benefits:
but greater ones from angels and from men, with whom, whether conversing in spirit or in bodily
presence, we are delighted in a wonderful and immense way with honorable pleasure: But
from the tree of life, which is in the midst of all these things, we receive every kind and the most perfect
delight of all, both of life and of all true pleasures. Therefore, it is harmoniously
united in the middle of the divine persons with man, a middle creature, and with that which is the bond of all, so that through that
middle all extremes might be united.

How sin and evil were introduced into the world from that tree. Chapter IIII.

[Large decorative initial S] For just as from that tree, rightly and duly received, all justice,
all right, and finally all good proceeds, so from the violated tree,
we do not doubt that all evil proceeded into the human race, and even into angels.
Nor should anyone wonder if we say that evil arises from good,
[Marginal note: August.] since it cannot proceed from elsewhere, as Augustine openly defines in the Enchi-
[Marginal note: Dyonisi.] ridion, and before him Dionysius says: The beginning and end of all evils is
good: And assigning a reason, he says: Nothing operates looking towards evil, but towards
good, namely, which it either neglects or unduly desires. This tree is therefore
the beginning of all goods and evils: because if anyone venerates and
observes it, he works good: But if anyone neglects it, and presumes to devour
or destroy it, he works evil, just as that most holy old man
[Marginal note: Symeõ.] Simeon testified concerning it, grafted into the human branch, saying: Behold, this one is appointed here
for the fall and rising of many in Israel, and in every people, both
angelic and human: For the angel sinned, being unwilling to receive him as
true Lord and true lawgiver, and to obey the rules described in him,
and being unwilling to revere him as mediator, and through whom we would be made co-heirs
according to the king's edict: Which Paul revealed to the Hebrews,
[Marginal note: Paulus.] saying: And when he introduced the firstborn into the world, he said:
And let all his angels worship him. But some of them, being stubborn, proudly
deviating from that highest rule of truth, fell into error and falsehood: Which
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS] the very source of truth attests, when he says: That murderer did not stand in the truth
from the beginning: From this, man also sinned, daring to extend a rebellious
hand to it, which is described by Moses as placed in the middle of paradise
[Marginal note: Moses.] under the type of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. Behold, how from this we are freed from great labor,

--- Page 800 ---
TONE EIGHT. 330

which is found in Dionysius [Marginal note: Diony] and other wise men in seeking what evil is, and whence it draws its origin: To resolve this, indeed, seems to be of the greatest difficulty, since evil is not a being, nor pure nothing, nor any cause, since every cause is something really existing: Nor does it seem to be an effect, because every effect proceeds from a cause, and such a cause is that in operating it always looks to the good: and always does good, although in a free agent imagination often errs, deeming or feigning that to be good which is not good: Nor does it seem how evil can arise from good, with the highest truth proclaiming: A good tree cannot bear bad fruit: And also, because nothing comes from contraries, except as from a starting point, as the Peripatetics [Marginal note: Peripat] are accustomed to say. Nor can evil be produced from evil, since evil is the cause of nothing, because it would have the nature of good: All these things, although most difficult at first glance, are nevertheless very easily resolved by attending to what has been said about the tree: For evil is the lack of rectitude, and of good, or of order, which is sought in a work: But rectitude and order are conformity with those rules existing in the tree itself, from which good and evil are distinguished: Which rectitude, when present, makes the work good, but when absent, it becomes evil, even if the law prohibiting a good object is good, into which the will is directed: a good will, which chooses: a good body, and our animal nature, to which we consent: a good concupiscible appetite, and irascible virtue, by which we either desire or refuse: because all these things have been provided by a good author for our benefit: Moreover, the exterior act is good, which is called the substratum of deformity: But only that disorder, and incongruity, or lack of order, and conformity with the rules existing in that tree, is evil: whence it is most clearly inferred that evil proceeds from that tree, not indeed produced by it, but because the agent deviates from it, as the apostle openly thunders, saying: When the law is taken away, sin is taken away: And again; If there were no law, sin [Marginal note: Paulus.] would not be imputed. Therefore, let Manichaeus lie here, who dreamed of two principles, one of good things, and that good, the other of evil things, and that evil: For there cannot be a producing principle unless it is good: Nor can a duality exist unless it draws its origin from a unity: Therefore, there would absolutely be one first principle, from which these two principles would emanate: Nor could God be happy if anything invincible opposed Him. Therefore, this rotten and putrid water of the Manichaeans proceeded from the fount of ignorance: For the law is good, the transgression of which is evil: But the law is truth itself, and the rule of action, which is in the incarnate Word, who is now called JESUS, and redeemer, but formerly the tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, because from it we know good and evil, and from it we have the means to do good and evil: And since all evil takes its origin from there, therefore with Jonah, who by the testimony of JESUS himself bore the same person and type, one can say: Because of me this storm has come. Indeed, in the heavens, because the angel, who became the dragon and the devil, willed
TT ij

--- Page 801 ---
**SECOND CANTICLE**

Iohan. to devour her, John saying: And the dragon stood, that he might devour her son, the son of the woman clothed with the sun, who was formerly called the tree of life, and of the knowledge of good and evil. But in the paradise of delight, because man wanted to stretch out his hand against the king's edict to it and devour it, that hail raged. Christ in this life always found delight in the middle. Chapter V.

**E**
And so that by his deeds he might show himself a perfect mediator, in his coming, in his state, in his departure, and in his kingdom, he always took care to hold the middle place: For being born in the midst of two animals, namely an ox
Theolo. and an ass, he is placed not without great mystery: For the ass (as more profound Theologians say) corresponds in the archetype to the right hand, where there is mercy, but the ox to the left, where there is justice: indeed, our mediator, making these meet each other in his coming, stood in their midst: which he wished to signify by the placement made from the beginning between the ox and the ass. He also wished to perform his first famous work in the middle: for while still a boy, he debated in the midst of the doctors: And when he had already received perfect growth in life and virtues, wishing to impart the charisms with which he was full, he placed himself in the midst, as he himself testifies, saying: I am in your midst, as one who serves, so that he might distribute the received gifts to all, namely with an equal distribution, at least a geometrical one. And when he had reached the end of life and the mysteries entrusted to him, he also took care to hold the middle place: For affixed to the cross, he was placed in the midst of two hanging thieves, one on the right, and the other on the left, so that, already constituted their judge, he might render to each their due according to the merits of each: and by a certain premonition of the great and final judgment, he had one to be rewarded on the right, and one to be punished on the left: By dividing them, he also hinted at the final division which he is to make. In his kingdom too, he always held and will hold the middle place between the Father and us, existing as advocate and mediator, and continually interceding for us: For, as John testifies, in that heavenly kingdom, he is in the midst of the throne, in the midst of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders. Finally, he holds the middle
Abrahā. in that divine archetype, in which Abraham, full of piety, is placed by the Hebrew Theologians on the right, but Isaac, most severely offered as a sacrifice, is placed on the
Theolo. left. But in the very middle is Jacob, in whose house, as an angelic oracle testifies, our mediator reigns eternally, having now returned to the place from which he came: to which place he also intends to lead us, made true Israelites, so that not without reason he said: I came not but unto the lost sheep of the
CHRI house of Israel. And so that not only us, but also our vows and works, the true
STVS. mediator might lead there, while we pray in harmony, namely in charity or well-ordered with God, or gather for some good work, he is present in our midst, to receive and carry to the Most High Father our vows and works which we perform in charity,
Idem. as he himself testifies, saying: Where there are two,

--- Page 802 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 331

...or three gathered in my name, there I am in the midst of them: And whatever they agree upon on earth, it will be done for them by my Father, with whom I have been constituted mediator for them.

Christ was the best mediator. Chapter VI.
[Decorative initial M] Rightly, therefore, this one, who is central in divine matters, and planted in the midst of paradise like a tree in the middle of a garden, and always maintained a middle position in life, became the true and best mediator between God and man, according to that saying of the apostle: There is one mediator of God [Marginal note: Paul] and men, Christ Jesus: Who is a true mediator for multiple reasons, but especially (as some think) from the flesh and human nature assumed: because of which, participating in both extremes, he was a good medium, a bond, and a glue binding, connecting, and uniting man with God: By which office, because true priests also function, any of them is called a mediator, not indeed the primary, but secondary, and holding the place of the true and primary mediator. He is moreover the best medium and mediator, and as it were a certain channel, through whom from the living and supreme fount flow living waters to us, which he freely offers us in many places: From which one possesses as much of the higher influx as one receives from the fullness of this mediator. Nor finally will a creature be able to return to God, from whom it proceeded, except through this medium, which participates in both extremes.

Through Christ man we ascend to God and the Father. Chapter VII.
[Decorative initial E] Thus, therefore, our Christ here is the middle way and the ladder by which we ascend to God the Father, as he himself openly declares in the Gospel, which is titled according to John, saying: I am the way, no one comes to the Father except through me. Who also showed himself to the ancient patriarch Jacob, in whose house he was to reign, in the figure of a ladder, [Marginal note: John] by which the chosen posterity of the seer would ascend to God: For the lower end of this ladder was fixed on earth, because the soul of the mediator, which was given as the price of human redemption, and prepared the way by which we might ascend to God, was fixed, just like other souls, in the flesh, which divinity itself accompanied: indeed the other end of the ladder, or the supreme summit of Christ the mediator himself, touched heaven, penetrating it even to God the Father, who leaned upon that summit, as if resting in it, and upholding the same, according to that saying of the same Son of God, which no one but he himself would have dared to assert: I am in the Father, and the Father is in me [Marginal note: CHRIST] : And again: The Father dwelling in me, he himself does the works. Knowing this, holy Jacob, rising, set up a stone as a pillar, pouring oil upon it, and saying: [Marginal note: Jacob] Truly the Lord is in this holy place, and I did not know it. But who the stone is, the Apostle openly reveals, saying: Now the rock was Christ. This [Marginal note: Paul] stone, therefore, Jacob set up as a pillar, looking up, namely, to him in the Lord—
TT iij

--- Page 803 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

**Paul.** ...the Lord, and in God: For indeed, raising him up as the Lord: for we always look up to and venerate him whose banner or emblem we raise: but he received oil in God, which in sacred scripture signifies divinity, pouring it out, confessing it, as it were, by a certain profession.

Nor is it surprising if he, who was recently called the ladder by which we ascend to God, is now called the stone to be placed as a foundation, upon which we may build all our things: For when Jacob, marveling, believing, and confessing, clearly perceived everywhere the divinity of this mediator hidden in human flesh, he said: "Surely the Lord, or Tetragrammaton, or Adonai (which name signifies divinity) is in this holy place, and I did not know it: This is none other than the house of God, and the gate of heaven:" A gate indeed, as he himself says: "I am the door; if anyone enters through me, he will be saved." But that house, in which all things were placed from the beginning, and into which he receives his household, so that he may provide pastures, namely those things which those standing in the vestibule, or even entering the atrium or portico of humanity, cannot taste.

Nor is it to be doubted that the Redeemer was shown beforehand to Jacob in this most famous vision, since God clearly expressed it, leaning upon the ladder with that most beautiful eulogy: "All the tribes of the earth shall be blessed in you and in your seed:" Wherever these words have been shown to the fathers, all assert with common consent that they were spoken of Christ: to whom also our patriarch Jacob vowed and swore, first demanding a confirming sign of those things which the oracle had promised in that which is said: He also made a vow, saying: "If the Lord will be with me," confirming, that is, those things which he promised I would obtain in this life: From which follows: "and will keep me in the way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and clothing to wear, and I return prosperously to my father's house, then the Lord shall be my God, and this stone which I have set up as a pillar shall be called the house of God: And of all that you give me, I will surely give a tenth to you:"

Broad indeed and ample is the spirit of the prophets, nay, the Holy Spirit filling the prophets and speaking through their mouths, therefore what is spoken of one is verified of many. But omitting other things, let us pursue those things which father Jacob, full of God, touches upon concerning Christ the mediator. Indeed, he demands three things in proof of the Messiah, concerning whom he prophesies: The first is the showing of the way, leadership, and custody; all of which the Messiah provided to all the sheep of the house of Israel that had perished: Who not only showed the way, but made himself the way, providing light and leadership to all: He also had such protection that he says: "No one will snatch my sheep out of my hand," which, indeed, I guard as a good shepherd. Moreover, he provided as food the living bread which came down from heaven. Finally, he himself, having become the Lamb, gave his own skin as a covering for our nakedness and shame, indeed, he alone could cover our sins: because we were all children of wrath, and stripped bare: Therefore the Apostle says—

--- Page 804 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 332

Apostle: Put on our Lord JESUS Christ. Therefore, the way having been lived, [Marginal note: Paul:]
and shown beforehand with the protection of the journey, and the best provisions for one
going to the appointed region, then he confesses Him, as the true Parent, and Lord.
He also receives Him as God, since from Him he has all things which pertain to eternal life:
to which no one could lead human nature, especially fallen nature, unless he were above
human nature itself, and not infected by it, and participated in both extremes:
And this one alone is Christ, and Messiah, God-man, and Man-God. Then therefore
he recognized Him as the true mediator, and the ladder, by which access to heaven is granted
to us: where no one from the infected mass could ever access, until our mediator opened
the doors, concerning whom Paul says: Let us hold fast the confession of our hope, having a great
High Priest, who has passed through the heavens, JESUS the Son of God, so that He might also [Marginal note: The same:]
introduce us there, and present us to the Father. Here that must not be passed over,
which we have as a most beautiful teaching, that not every spirit, every oracle, and every
revelation is to be believed: but the truth of those things which precede those which are
foretold must be sought out: Or sometimes corroborating signs must be demanded,
as our Patriarch Jacob did here; Which are also sometimes offered by the foretelling
spirit, just as it was said to Hezekiah through Isaiah: Ask for yourself a sign from the Lord
your God: And which the Prophet granted to him who wished to ask, [Marginal note: Jacob:]
saying: The Lord himself will give you a sign. But the apostles asked, saying: What [Marginal note: Isaiah:]
sign of your coming? Nor should it disturb anyone that the Lord calls that generation
unbelieving and perverse which seeks a sign: because they had many [Marginal note: Apostle:]
signs proving that He was from God, to which He sometimes sent them, saying:
If you do not wish to believe me, believe the works: for the works which I [Marginal note: CHRIST:]
do, they bear witness concerning me. Therefore, these sought a sign of signs,
not so that they might have a reason to believe, but so that they might quibble, therefore they deserved to be
rebuked by the knower of hearts.

How, according to the opinion of the Apostle, Christ is the mediator of the New Testament. Chapter VIII.

ET beyond those things which have been explained concerning our mediator,
it occurs to declare why He is called by the apostle the mediator of the new testament:
For the explanation of which it must be noted that in a testament there is
one who testifies, another the legatee, another the witness, another the trustee
or executor of the testament: And this one is properly called a mediator,
just as Moses was named by the apostle the mediator of the old testament:
The Law (he says to the Galatians) was given through angels in the hand of a mediator, that is, [Marginal note: Moses:]
Moses, who was the executor of that testament, not indeed in its entirety because of the sin [Marginal note: Paul:]
of the struck rock. Therefore, Joshua supplied for him, leading the people to [Marginal note: Joshua:]
the land promised in that old testament: But JESUS truly perfe-

TT iij

--- Page 805 ---
CANTICI SECVNDI

perfect, and in no way deficient, was a full executor of the new testament: Which testament was promulgated by the Son, and committed to execution: but ordained by the Father, as the Son himself testifies in the Gospel, which is titled according to Luke, saying: Behold, I appoint to you a kingdom, just as my Fa-
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] ther appointed to me: And again, as a faithful executor of the Father's will, he promised to say: Come, blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you, indeed prepared by the Father, by whom also you are blessed. Behold therefore from these, and many other places, those things which pertain to the new testament were disposed by the Eternal Father: but committed to execution by the Son: to whom he granted such power, that he could even make a testament. Therefore, Jesus Christ was a testator by the power given to him by the Father: he was also the executor of this better testament, just as Moses was of the former:

But why this new testament is better than
[Marginal note: Paul.] the old, Paul, assigning a reason with the Hebrews, says: Because it is sanctioned by better promises: For in the former testament, this lower land was promised, namely the land of Canaan, flowing with that milk and honey, about which it has often been said. But in the second, the land which is the flesh, and the tabernacle of the soul, and the divinity of the Messiah, was promised and given, from which flowed more perfect milk and honey than from the land of Canaan: For from his very fleshly body, that wisdom was communicated to us, which none of the wise of this age had known before, and that mellifluous taste was given to the human race, so that an innumerable multitude of men and women, enticed by that sweetness, exposed body and soul to various and most atrocious kinds of death: Which they could by no means have suffered with such alacrity, unless strengthened and anointed by the sweetness of honey flowing from the divinity through the earthly flesh and humanity of Christ.

Finally, that land of the living was promised, as the testator himself clearly promises in the Gos-
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] pel, which is titled according to Matthew, saying: Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. Again, in the former testament, length of life was frequently promised upon that lo-
[Marginal note: Deut.] wer land, and especially in that place where it is said in Deuteronomy: Keep the commandments of the Lord, and the ceremonies, and the judgments, that you may live, and that he may multiply you, and bless you in the land which you are entering to possess. For he is your life, and the length of your days: that you may dwell in the land for which the Lord swore to your Fathers: But in the new testament, a heavenly, divine, and eternal life is promised.

Also, in the former testament, elemental rain, fertility of the earth, abundance of fruits, and finally every favor and abundance of temporal things were promised: But in the new, the pastures of the better man are promised, to be taken within and without, namely in both natures of Christ. Also promised was a generous influx of fruits, and of all heavenly goods, namely graces, charisms, and all divine things. Again, in the former testament, peace that would soon be lost was promised, and victory over human enemies, Assyrians, Philistines, Moab, Ammon, Amalek, and the like:

--- Page 806 ---
TONE EIGHT. 333

But in the new testament eternal peace is promised, to be preserved by an everlasting covenant, just as the testator said at his departure: "My peace I give to you, my peace I re- [Marginal note: CHRIST.] linquish to you:" certainly not that which the world is accustomed to give, but a better one, both with God and with angels, which the world itself cannot give: But we can by no means attain this, unless a perfect victory has first been achieved: which also (as Paul testifies) we obtain through our sole mediator: in which victory and peace [Marginal note: Paul.] we obtain every good.

Digression concerning the war declared against those peoples by the ancient Fathers. Chapter IX.

[Large decorative initial E] AND because we have touched upon the perpetual war entrusted to the ancient fathers against the Assyrians, Philistines, and other peoples recently named, we have by no means thought it right to omit an unexplained matter, because all other things happened to those fathers in figure (or symbolically). We have not, however, considered this unimportant, especially because of two points touched upon in the declaration of that war, which seem by no means fitting for the people of God, and even less for God himself: One of these is, because a perpetual war was commanded, and even to the utter destruction of the enemies, and of all things which they possessed. The other, because it is declared that there is perpetual war between God and these enemies themselves.

Concerning the former, there is God's precept in Deuteronomy against Amalek in these words: "Remember what Amalek did to you on the way, when you came out of Egypt, [Marginal note: Deut.] how he attacked the rear of your army, those who were weary and lagging, when you were exhausted by hunger and labor, and he did not fear God: Therefore, when the Lord your God has given you rest, you shall blot out his name from under heaven." Since this was not fully done, therefore it is again commanded to Saul, that he should destroy Amalek himself, and all that was his, even to the smallest animals, and all his household goods, as we read in the first book of Kings. Concerning the [Marginal note: Book of Kings.] latter, however, we have in Exodus, how the hand upon the throne of God is said to fight against Amalek himself from generation to generation: These, he says, A- [Marginal note: Exodus.] malekites together with Assyrians, Philistines, Moabites, and Ammonites, indicate certain powers of darkness, against which a most fierce war has been declared for us, and perpetual enmities have been set, as it is said in Genesis: "I will put enmities between you and the seed of the woman," because that ancient serpent (of whom Amalek was a member and [Marginal note: Genesis.] a certain power) presumed to oppose the first man, and consequently his posterity proceeding to the true land of promise, and a place truly and not figuratively destined, just as here, following a father and leader, he presumed to oppose the people going to a figurative place. Hence, against both, a perpetual war has been declared without any peace or truces, and against all that is theirs, because all those things are an impediment to us striving for our homeland. Hence, we who are to fight for Christ vow to renounce the devil, the world, and
TT v

--- Page 807 ---
CANTICLE THE SECOND

his pomps. Regarding these peoples, beyond what we have discussed above, we have judged this worthy of all ob-
servation: that against these enemies we have victory
[Marginal note: Paul.] only from God through Jesus Christ our mediator; which Paul
also proclaims with an clear voice, saying: But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory
[Marginal note: Moses.] through JESUS Christ our Lord. And Moses hints at this same thing in his typical
progress: For the people who fought against Amalek then only
won when Moses prayed with outstretched arms in the manner of a cross, so that he might
implore help from God through Him who was to be affixed to the cross.
And when victory was achieved, Moses built an altar and invoked 'Adonai my standard-
bearer': For which a faulty translation has, 'And he called his name, The Lord is my
exaltation.' Appropriately indeed he called the mediator himself, through whom
he had victory, Adonai, or the Tetragrammaton, just as Messiah
and our mediator is often called by that name in scripture. He also rightly added, 'my standard-
bearer,' because He Himself is the standard-bearer of everyone fighting against the powers of dark-
ness and their prince, whom our standard-bearer, raised on the cross,
defeated and cast out. But because the Eternal Father always favors the Son, fighting
even for Him against His enemies, according to that prophetic saying: 'Sit at My right
hand, until I make Your enemies Your footstool,' therefore Moses added,
'because the hand is upon the seat of [Hebrew: יה] Jah, fighting for Adonai, or the Tetragrammaton,
from generation to generation:' The hand, indeed, is power, not
created, but divine, because this alone can be upon the seat of Jah. Which word
signifies divinity, indeed, the pure essence of God, which no one can fittingly
praise unless purified and transformed into a better and purer state.
Hence the Church forbade anyone to say Hallelujah during the time of penance, before a person was fully
purified: which, interpreted, means, 'Praise Jah.'
And this those ancient and good Fathers learned from David, full of God, who never
wanted to sing Hallelujah unless he had first removed, through many psalms, whatever
[Marginal note: David.] impediments there were to this most celebrated praise:
Hence, at the end of the one hundred third psalm,
with enemies defeated and absolved from all impediments, he sang: 'Let
sinners fail from the earth and the wicked, so that they are no more: bless my soul the
Lord, Hallelujah.' Thus purified, he repeated Hallelujah in almost all the subsequent psalms:
which he had never done in the preceding ones. Therefore, the hand of the Eternal
Father fights upon the seat of divinity for Adonai, that is, Christ, and our
mediator, against Amalek, namely the diabolical power, until hostile
death is utterly destroyed and swallowed up in the victory given by God to Christ
the head and His members. It is not surprising, therefore, if such a dire and perpetual
war has been declared against us against this Amalek and peoples similar to him: And if
God is said to continually wage war against them, not indeed for Himself, but granting
us victory through JESUS Christ our Lord: From which we conclude
that He is also the mediator of the victory to be obtained by us.

--- Page 808 ---
EIGHTH TONE. 334.
Whether we need a means to come to this Christ the mediator. Chapter X.

[Decorative initial E]
And since it can be questioned whether another means is necessary for us, through
which we may come to this mediator: Concerning this, briefly explaining myself,
I say that there is no mediator of a mediator, lest we proceed to
infinity, but two means, or prior dispositions, are rightly required,
through which we may receive him and be united to him: Of these, one
emanates from above, namely, the election of divine clemency and piety, placing
us among the sheep that had perished from the true house of Israel, for whose redemption he
came: The other is, that we labor faithfully with the talents entrusted to us, so that that election
may be effective in us, according to the purpose of the chooser, and that we follow the footsteps
of the mediator himself, who said: "I have given you an example, that just as I have
done, so also you may do:" Who again exhorts and invites us to follow him, [Marginal note: CHRIST.]
saying: "Whoever follows me does not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life:"
that light indeed, which illuminates every person, provided that no one, enveloped in the dark-
ness of sins, voluntarily refuses that light, through which, without any
other means, divine election standing firm, we can be united with the mediator, and receive,
according to our capacity, all things which we have explained in this canticle are to be communicated
from the super-mundane source to all members of the Christian body through the head
and our mediator Christ: from whose fullness each one receives a part suitable to himself.

--- Page 809 ---
**OF THE SECOND CANTICLE**

**Proem to the Third and Newest Canticle.**

[Decorative initial C]INCE we have now completed two canticles, of which the first, and ancient one, pertains to the harmony of the greater world with the lesser, and the archetype; the second, new one, concerning the agreement of all members with Christ the head, has been dealt with; it remains that we approach the newest canticle, by which we may complete the harmonious progress and state of the lesser world, for whose sake all things were made, into its due end. Which we consider all the more pleasing to the Supreme Prince, the more accurately it has fashioned man himself, beyond the other things we have already discussed. Concerning which canticle (if I am not mistaken) the Prophet, imbued with full light to understand all things, prophesied, when he said: God, I will sing a new song to you. Indeed, I will sing of man, who is God's newest work, to be brought into harmony with the Creator, through the observance of the law and the ten precepts, which are indicated by the ten-stringed psaltery on which the Prophet played.
[Marginal note: David.]
Since the sacrament of these precepts is entirely contained in the evangelical cithara, and the praise of both is rendered by a well-strung body, and a harmonious spirit, and a well-singing soul, therefore he sings in another hymn: Rejoice, O well-strung men, in God our helper, from whom comes all perfect symphony and praise. Shout for joy to the God of Jacob, you who have overcome and trampled all impediments to due praise.
[Marginal note: The same.]
Take up a psalm, by which you may praise God with mind and soul, and give in His praise a well-composed drum of the body, and then you will take up the joyful psaltery with the cithara. For the most joyful psaltery of the law is taken up when it is perfected in the evangelical cithara, in which (as is clear to one who understands well) even the smallest 'yod' and the tiniest 'tittle' of the law itself is fulfilled. For it contains all its sacraments.

And then harmonious songs are rendered, when with the well-strung instruments of body, spirit, and soul, we render to God, to the best of our ability, due praises and harmonious works. But we render fuller songs when, having overcome and subdued our enemies, we arrive at the true praises of Yah (יה), as the prophet teaches in the first hundred and three psalms, when he says: Let sinners vanish from the earth and the wicked, so that they are no more; bless the Lord, O my soul, Hallelujah, that is, praise Yah.
[Marginal note: The same.]
Which no one can do unless enemies are put to flight, as we are taught in the aforementioned psalms. But we shall render the most perfect and fullest songs (God willing) when we praise Him in the highest together with the angels, resounding in that choir of the blessed, not only with the tongue, but with spirit, soul, body, and all members, to the praise of the Creator, to whom all things owe glory and honor forever. And this we shall accomplish with the diapasonic consonance of eight tones, just as we have done in the two preceding canticles.

--- Page 810 ---
335
TONES OF THE THIRD CANTICLE.

[Decorative initial D] Concerning the manifold harmony of the soul, and body, and virtues. Tone. I.
Concerning the consonance of the soul, through the intelligences of things. Tone. II.
Concerning the agreement of man with intelligences, heavens, and sacred things. Tone. III.
Concerning the agreement of all things with man well-tuned, so that he may
operate in all things, and command all things. Tone. IIII.
Concerning the consonance of the soul, with its own spirit, and all other
spirits. Tone. V.
Concerning the sweetest harmony, which well-tuned men make
with God. Tone. VI.
Concerning the harmony of the body, and soul changed for the better, through
resurrection. Tone. VII.
Concerning the sweetest harmonies, and that eternal rest in attained
blessedness. Tone. VIII.

CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST TONE.

[Decorative initial D] Concerning that agreement and symmetry which is in the body. Chap. I.
Concerning that consonance which is between the body and the soul. Chap. II.
Whence dissonance arises in the body. Chap. III.
Whence, and what consonance or dissonance is between the body and the soul.
Chap. IIII.
Concerning the tempering of the body

--- Page 811 ---
OF THE THIRD CANTICLE
CONCERNING THAT WHICH IS IN THE BODY, ITS CONVE-
nience & Symmetry. Chapter One.

[Decorative initial T] O GREAT is the body's commenſuration, that skilled
architects proportion temples, edifices, homes, columns, architra-
ves, bases, & all parts of their works, whatever they
may be, with their even minute parts, namely, tori,
quadrangles, scotias, plinths, cornices, astra-
gals, modillions, spirals, stylobates, & whatever pertains to
architraves, bases, columns, & antae,
or to any kind of building, to the measure of the human bo-
[Marginal note: Vitru.] dy: just as Vitruvius, easily the foremost authority of this doctrine, intersperses (this idea) in a long
discourse. No building can have a principle of composition with any symmetry and propor-
tion, unless it has within itself the exact proportion of the mem-
bers of a well-formed human being. For the proportion of architecture (as he says) is
the established part of the members in every work, and the modulation of the whole, from which the principle
of symmetries is pro-
duced. And proceeding further, he strives to prove that all numbers,
and the numbers called denarii, or sestertii, were dis-
covered from the joints of the body. For the ancients counted with their fin-
gers, & indicated numbers with their fingers themselves:
& all buildings were propor-
tioned to the measure of the body. To this, the supreme architect God too greatly assents,
who taught Noah to build the ark according to the measure of the hu-
man body, as we explained above. Moreover, I have seen ex-
perts derive the measurements of ships from the human body: Indeed, the supreme craftsman himself fashioned the entire world's ma-
chine, its symmetry to the human body & its entire symbolic nature: whence
not undeservedly is that called the great world, and this (man) the small world. Their con-
sonance, & symbol we have demonstrated in part, while we revealed all elements and ele-
mented things, heavens, angels, & God himself (if it is permitted) en-
closed in man.

We have also explained with what great proportion elements, qualities, & com-
plexions, agree in the human body, & with what great consonance the mem-
bers' circum-
ference harmonizes. But others add that even the longitu-
dinal com-
mensurations of the body's mem-
bers are proportioned. For the face of the head, from the chin to the top of the fore-
head, & the lowest roots of the hair, is one-tenth part.
Likewise, the palm of the hand to the ex-
treme middle finger, the same amount. The head, from the chin to the top of the crown,
one-eighth. From the top of the chest to the roots of the hair, one-sixth. To the top of the crown,
one-fourth. Of the height of the mouth or face itself, one-third part, from the bottom of the chin to
the lowest part of the nostrils. The nose from the lowest part of the nostrils, to the middle end of the eyebrows, the same amount.
From that end, to the lowest roots of the hair, where the forehead is formed, like-
wise one-third part. The foot,
however, of the body's height, one-sixth. The cubit, one-fourth. The chest, likewise, one-fourth. Thus the re-
maining all members have their own com-
mensurations of proportion, & these are al-
ways harmonious. so that a well-proportioned (body) may bring forth a wonderful (effect) from con-
sonance iu-

--- Page 812 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 336

delight to those who behold it. For all those measurements are divided by multiple, or superparticular, or mixed proportions: from which always results harmony, either simple or compound. For a decuple proportion makes a triple octave and a fifth. An octuple [makes] a triple octave. A quadruple, a double octave; a sexcuple, a double octave and a fifth. A triple, an octave and a fifth. And in a similar way all the commensurations of other members are proportioned and consonant: and what is greater, they are most congruent with the members of the world, with the joints of the heavens, and with the measurements of the archetype, which is supreme. For there is no member in man that does not correspond to some sign, to some planet, and to some measurement, which is in the archetype, as ancient Theologians teach. Moreover, in him (as we explained above) [Marginal note: Anc. Theol.] are elements and humors, mixed in due and harmonic proportions: from whose proper mixture comes health, and from imbalance comes illness. And all, I will not say parts of the body, but portions of the whole man, in one and the same soul vivifying all things, like the strings of instruments, or various melodies, agree in one consonance. And although the life of man may seem multifaceted—vegetative, animal, spiritual, intellectual, or whatever else it may be—yet there is a single principle of life in all. Hence, not without mystery, Scripture says that God, when he gave life to man, breathed into his face the breath, or soul of lives, which the Hebrews call נשמת חיים *nif-mat haiim*: it says "of lives," so that it may be intimated that in that breath, or soul, which was infused, every kind of life was contained, which pertains to the whole man himself.

Concerning that consonance which is between body and soul. Chapter II.

What kind of harmony there is between body and soul, which seem entirely different, the Pythagoreans, principal investigators of consonances, have attempted to conjecture from that most tranquil and sweet union which is observed by all. Among whom, Timaeus Locrus, a distinguished Pythagorean, in his usual manner outlined, saying: "For the soul to be well, the body needs to have its strengths, health, keen senses, vigor, beauty, the beginning of which external beauty is commensurability, which they call symmetry." For the members themselves, and for the soul, nature prepares a dwelling, as an instrument: and it is obedient, as it were, a certain adaptable thing to the principles of living and subjection: to which Proclus agrees in his commentary on Plato's Timaeus, saying: "The soul from the beginning was constituted according to harmonic principles: and every body is said to be joined to it according to proportions: and the whole universe itself is harmonically and fittingly bound together." And whence these harmonic structures arise, he continues, saying: "The principles of these are a force implanted by nature, or by the supreme artificer, so that man may be well-tuned with body and soul." Which Plato also explains quite clearly, while speaking of the soul of both worlds, whose principle is si-

--- Page 813 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

millima, he says: After the entire constitution of the soul was completed according to the Creator's mind, which is first in intention and in idea, He soon fashioned all that is corporeal within it, and adapting the middle to the middle, He joined it with fitting modulation. For a middle body suits a middle soul, an extreme (body) to an extreme (soul), and a supreme (body) to a supreme (soul): so that the disposition of the body may be adapted to the disposition of the soul, more than the reverse. Which holds true in both ways, since a nobler, a less noble, and a middle soul are found: for which, in this world's machine, a body is temporarily arranged according to the condition of the soul itself to be received. Also in the lesser world (man), the soul is disposed with a threefold difference, just like the body: like the typical ark, which Noah, not without great mystery, built at God's command. For there is a baser virtue of the soul in that lower part of the body which is below the diaphragm, represented by that lower three-storied part of the ark. There is a middle and animalistic power, above the diaphragm itself, up to the head, whose likeness was held by that middle station of the ark, in which the animals resided. There is a supreme and intellectual virtue in the head, denoted by the supreme part of the ark, in which Noah dwelt with his rational family. Of which each soul, or portion of it, with the dwelling in which it resides, is most proportionate. For unless there is a proportion between soul and body, human strength is easily led to dissolution and downfall: as Chalcidius says. [Marginal note: Chal.] The greatest incitement to vices is in the body; and in the concretion of humors and spirits, by whose abundance or deficiency, we are more prone to lust or anger. To these are added the strong danger of life itself to be lived, sickness, reproach, and lack of necessary things, by which occupied, we are led away from honorable studies to things consistent with an instituted life, and we are called without recognition of the true good. What this congruence is, is indeed most recondite, yet it has been somewhat outlined by the wise. Who, investigating the various dispositions of souls, judge that they obtain various fates according to the diversity of the means through which they have passage to us, and that these are joined with bodies proportionate to them. For in a body guided by a Jovian temperament, they believe a soul is infused, tempered by the divine power and intelligence, to which Jupiter responds and obeys. But into a body boiling with Martial impetus and bile, they believe a soul infused by the divine power and intelligence is poured, to which Mars, connected, is at hand. And thus they judge it should be decided concerning others. According to which disposition, if the soul, purified and expiated, operates well, it returns to the divine power, or the dwelling, from which it descended. And since there are many mansions (as Christ testifies) [Marginal note: CHRI- STVS.] in the Father's house, and these indeed are varied, otherwise they would not be many: souls are also varied, not only in gratuitous gifts, but in natural ones, which follow the gratuitous ones, if Gregory [Marginal note: Grego.] thinks rightly, who speaks of angels, and consequently says concerning men: Those who participate in the distribution of gifts, also agree in the disposition of natural things. In which sense are to be understood the words of the Savior saying, that to one were given five talents, to another two, to another one.

--- Page 814 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 337

talent: or that (as another evangelist says) ten minas were given to ten servants, so that each might work [Marginal note: Luke.] according to the measure granted to him. According to this virtue, he who works receives a reward in proportion to the condition of the talent, or gift granted. But if he neglects to work, the gift is taken away and given to another worker, so that he may complete the place prepared for the influx and the granted gift.
Concerning this return of souls to places proportionate to them, and from which they departed, academics speaking with their [Marginal note: Academics.] Plato say that they return to their planets, perhaps speaking more profoundly than [Marginal note: Plato. / Theologians.] many readers might imagine. Our theologians, however, say that they return to those choirs of angels, to which they lived conformably. But (if I am not mistaken) they return to those supermundane abodes, to which the way and the gate is He who said: I am the way, I am the gate; if anyone enters through me, he will be saved. For through [Marginal note: CHRIST.] Christ, entry is not given to planets or angels, but to God Himself, and the eternal Father: in whose house, and in whose amplitude of divinity, are those many and eternal mansions.

Whence dissonance arises in the body. Chapter III.

[Decorative initial C] The body, though it be most temperate, sometimes feels a most vehement dissonance. We do not doubt that this happens primarily for two reasons. One is a distemperament of the humors, arising either from superfluity, or from diminution, or from intrinsic or extrinsic alteration. The other is that it is at odds with celestial influences, so that influences otherwise good, harm it. It is at odds, indeed, when the soul deviates from what the celestial influx requires. Many other disorders follow this disarrangement, because the dissenting [soul/person] is immediately subjected to an evil demon (says Proculus) [Marginal note: Proculus.] until it is purified by due expiations. What the distemperaments of the humors are, since this is the concern of physicians, leaving to them what is theirs, we will run through those things which pertain to our subject, and to the proper institution of a better human being.
For the humors are distempered, whence infirmities arise, not only from superfluous, diminished, or altered matter, but more often because the body is badly governed by the soul. For if it is fed with superfluous food, whence superfluous humors are generated, is this not the fault of the soul not curbing gluttony? And if harmful foods are eaten, is not the imprudence of the soul to be blamed? And if there is superfluous labor, whence weariness and various alteration of the humors, is not our ignorance to be blamed? And if a person commits something whence sadness arises, and black bile increases, by which the humors are infected, or if he grieves and is saddened more than is fitting about events, so that bile boils over, or melancholy is suppressed, is this not from a soul that is ill-disposed, which is absorbed by Aristotelian sadness, which corrupts the power of the one possessing it? But if the soul, like a leader in the entire human army, agreeing with the emperor or king, well moderates all lower appetites and forces, directing all against due enemies: if some sadness is brought back from battle or labor, that is evangelical, not harmful, but one that will immediately be turned into joy. For as to those who love God (as Paul says) all things co- [Marginal note: Paul] VV

--- Page 815 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

...operate for good, so to those dissenting from God, all things harm, all things turn to evil: because against such disobedient ones, every creature arms itself, namely for the vengeance of God's enemies: as it is said in the Book of Wisdom. Hence [Marginal note: Auguſt.] Augustine says: The cause of all evils is sin: which is a disorder and distemper of the soul, and of the human leader. When it rules badly, or is overthrown, all things rebel and become distempered, to the destruction of its own dominion. For then the animal spirits, having lost their bridle, rush into battle; evil humors arise, and even good ones, disordered, separated from each other by a certain alternation, vex and torment the body. Then celestial influences are harmful, just as the light of the sun to eyes poorly disposed. Then God's lictors, even they prepare themselves to torment [Marginal note: Dauid] men, according to that of the prophet: "And He sent forth plagues through evil angels," or (as the truth of the letter has it) "He sent distress through evil angels." Then (as [Marginal note: Iſaias.] Isaiah says) "The Lord will strike you with corrupted air." Knowing this, the royal pro- [Marginal note: Dauid] phet said: "Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am weak; heal me, for all my bones are troubled," that is, my strengths and my virtues. And whence the strengths are troubled, and infirmity has arisen, he declares by adding: "And my soul is greatly troubled." Which (the soul) also sometimes becomes weak, so that it says: "Heal my soul, for I have sinned against You." From whose infirmity and rebellion, follows the rebellion and distemper of all things that ought to obey it. Nor should you say: "The good are often vexed more than the evil," because no one is vexed in that which he is good, but in that which he is evil. For take away the evil to be punished, the vexation will cease, because the mercy of God is over all His works. But the justice of God is over all evil works: which are not of God, but of man, or of the devil, or of both together. And just as there is no man who does not sin: so there is no man who does not need purification, and who is not subject to punitive justice. Therefore, man is purged by this momentary distress, so that he may flee the eternal: which is inflicted upon those who, having become children of the devil and completely separated from God's family, are handed over to that fire and torment which is prepared for the devil and his angels. Nor should anyone say that infirmities arise from those six natural causes which Avi- [Marginal note: Auicen.] cenna enumerates, namely inanition, repletion of food, or infected air, sleep, wakefulness, exercise: but most especially from accidents of the soul, namely anger, sadness, joy, and similar things: because all these (if one pays close attention) depend on and are governed by the soul, since it is in its power to give or withhold food from the body, to wake and sleep, and to exercise the body at will. For a wise person can admit or repel anger, sadness, and similar accidents of the soul, which are (as he says) the most powerful cause of the body's temperament and distemper, not only in oneself, but in others: asserting that a soul strongly elevated and inflamed by vehement imagination changes health or sickness even in the bodies of others. Nor should anyone blame complexion: because (as Ecclesiastes says) "God made man upright and most temperate:" namely, as to body and soul. But he himself has entangled himself in infinite questions, or (as the truth of the letter has it) "He sought out many thoughts." Whence, not content with the uprightness and perfect state in which the Creator had placed him, he wandered about many things,

--- Page 816 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 338

From which followed a disturbance of the soul and body, and a complete downfall from his state and from his uprightness. Which is most fully shown in the Protoplast, who, not content with the upright law which his Creator had established for him, began to seek unlawful things, from which that disturbance of the soul followed. And feeling his flesh rebellious, he was ashamed of his nakedness; and finally, cast out from his happy state, he was condemned to labors, toils, and many disturbances, with the tree of life and health forbidden to him, which could have always preserved him unharmed. Therefore, man having been cast down from his most upright and happy state, the one born is subjected to ignorance, ill health, and many disturbances, until reason and mind are recovered. If these (reason and mind) should rule the body, all things will be temperate, because all things obey the soul or mind as to the nobler part, as Aristotle teaches in the first volume of "On the Heavens" [Aristo.], just as it happens in well-minded people, and those who have driven the soul into its proper seat and have attained mind: From which, if man is not cast down, neither the body

--- Page 817 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTO**

**Paul** [tab] teaches Timothy to use wine for strengthening the stomach: And as we said before concerning Paul, he commands all our service to be reasonable. To this,
**Jerome** [tab] agreeing, also prescribes that our fasts should be moderate: since God is not pleased
[tab] by the emptiness of our stomach, or that we support our tottering steps with a staff or a wall.
[tab] But those fasts, and those abstinences and macerations are to be undertaken
[tab] by which the body is not destroyed, but reduced to servitude, the spirit may grow strong, and
[tab] become stronger and more agile in the service of God. Moreover, there ought to be a continuous
[tab] disagreement and struggle between the heavenly man and the sensual man: until the former has reduced the latter
[tab] to perfect servitude: so that, agreeing and peaceful together, they may be blessed
[tab] in that very kingdom of peace. Indeed, the harmony of body and soul must be preserved:
[tab] by which the Creator bound them together, until (by His command) that dissolution occurs, by which, freed from
[tab] this body, in which existing we wander from the Lord, the soul may obtain
[tab] possession of the promised kingdom. Having obtained this, it may again resume the body, now clothed in incorruption,
[tab] immortality, and the nature of spirit: so that, united together, they may never thereafter be dissolved:
[tab] nor ever admit discord, from which any sadness could be generated.

[tab] Concerning the tempering of the body, and the disposition of the dwelling through natural remedies. Ch. V.

[tab] [Decorative initial Q containing a seated figure] But since when the humors are discordant, the animal spirits also disagree,
[tab] which reside in those very humors, and the senses, the imaginative faculty,
[tab] and all the organs of the higher soul are disturbed: which, when it follows
[tab] the passions of the body, is itself also disordered. Hence, remedies and
**Ecclesiasticus.** [tab] physicians are not to be scorned, as scripture says: "Honor the physician: for the Most High
**David** [tab] created him for necessity." And again: "The Most High brought forth medicine from the earth,
[tab] and a prudent man will not abhor it." And because (as it is implied) all
[tab] healing is from God: therefore the prophet says: "Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed." For from Him is
[tab] health and medicine bestowed, for both parts of man. For the power of herbs, roots, stones,
[tab] words, and all things pertaining to the remedies of both parts of man, is implanted by God:
[tab] who sometimes directly from Himself, sometimes through intelligences and heavens,
[tab] works those things which pertain to the health and nourishment of the body. And this indeed
[tab] especially for the sake of the soul, which He cares for most. Which, in order to be perfectly healthy,
[tab] requires a healthy body: Therefore that wise man prayed that there might be a sound mind in a sound
[tab] body. For both, therefore, the Most High prepared remedies and physicians. For healing the
**Apollo.** [tab] body (by God's disposition) there was much labor of wise men: Apollo, Aesculapius,
**Aesculapius.** [tab] Hippocrates, Paul, Galen, John Damascene, Dioscorides, Avicenna, and many
**Hippocrates.** [tab] Arabs, Persians, Greeks, and various nations: some of whom were most diligent
**Paul** [tab] in investigating the natures and virtues of things, and others in composing and applying them,
**Galen** [tab] according to the quality of bodies and illnesses.

--- Page 818 ---
**TONE ONE.** [Page number:] **339**

of life, whose leaves were for the healing of the nations. With this health recovered, the nations themselves, now brought to maturity, would take from the fruits of life, which are called the food of the strong, not to be taken by any infirm person. But concerning the physician, the Psalmograph sings: *He sent* [Marginal note: CHRIST] *his word, and healed them.* Hence the very Word sent by the Father, and made flesh, said of himself: *Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick.* And Origen, explaining that sacramental song: *We will run after the fragrance of your ointments*, [Marginal note: Origen] he says. For indeed, God the Father, anointing him with various ointments, made him Christ and a physician. For it was fitting for God the Father to destine such a bridegroom for the infirm bride. This bridegroom, in order to perform the office of a good physician, healing the whole man, also gave power and a mandate to the Apostles concerning the healing of both parts of man: as is found in the Gospel titled according to Matthew. [Marginal note: Matthew CHRIST] With this power delivered, he said: *Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, cast out demons.* Afterwards he commands that, unencumbered by gold, silver, all kinds of money, purse, superfluous tunics, shoes of vanity, and the staff of human or worldly power, they should announce peace in whatever house they entered. Observe (I ask) the order of the supreme physician: For he commands those whom he sends as guides of men on the way of salvation: that first they heal bodies: and raise those who are dead: and cure those possessed by demons

--- Page 819 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

Drawn from God: then from the harmonious composition of medicines among themselves, and suitable for the body receiving them, which works much, although little known to the wise men of our time: who, following their Aristotle, attribute everything to primary and secondary qualities, content only with their balance, when nevertheless we see some simple things operate more than fire, which is not only in the third or fourth degree, but supremely hot, and the most active of all elements. Whence it is necessary for this to proceed from a greater virtue than that of the primary qualities.

We also see that proportionate things are very beneficial, while disproportionate things are harmful: so that we are compelled to believe that a harmonious force contributes much. Moreover, the virtue and effective spirit of the physician works, because (as we have said) a strong imagination changes qualities even in another's body. This is especially true when the sick person, applying faith to the physician, disposes himself to receive the healer's virtue. How much it
[Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] is worth, Christ Jesus, the master of all physicians, indicates, while from those who were to receive healing from him, both of the better and of the worse man, he sought it, or commended it in those who had received it. For he said to the Canaanite woman, "O woman, great is your faith: Be it done to you as you have asked." And to the woman with the hemorrhage he said, "Your faith has made you well." And from the blind men seeking light, he required faith, saying, "Do you believe that I can illuminate you?" And to the eunuch of Queen Candace, seeking the remedy of baptis-
[Marginal note: Philip.] m, Philip said, "If you believe with all your heart, it is permitted for me, namely, to give you this medicine of baptism." And so always the heavenly physician, and the disciples instructed by him, sought faith from those who desired to be healed, whether in one or in both parts of man.

Also beneficial for the temperament of the body, and consequently of the soul, are proper exercises and joyful and honorable occupations. There are also very many aids for recovering and preserving strength. Among these is the choice of suitable and healthy foods, concerning all of which authors of medicine write in full volumes. To these, as is customary, we entrust those who need their help: so that we may ascend to discuss those things which primarily temper the better man, but from the inferior, as far as it pertains to the temperament of the superior itself. And since among other things prudence contributes to this, something must also be discussed about it.

How much prudence and proper regimen contribute to achieving such temperaments. Cap. VI.

[Decorative initial N depicting a figure at a desk] OR is health and the temperament of the body to be expected so much from external things, that one's own regimen should be scorned, which ought to be no less than in irrational animals, to which
[Marginal note: Salomon] Solomon sends the rational creature, when he says: "If you do not know yourself, O most beautiful among women, go forth and follow the tracks of your flocks." In these, we see prudence in preventing evils and in procuring good things. For horses and asses carrying us, and other animals, guard against precipices: and by two opposing...

--- Page 820 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS.                                                              340

sheep, they choose better. In pastures they take beneficial herbs, they reject harmful ones.
Wounded Cretan goats seek dittany for healing, and are healed. When
they taste it, they are said to expel arrows from their body. Hinds a little before giving birth
cleanse themselves with a certain herb, which is called seseli. Crows, when they feel themselves
poisoned by Gallic poison, seek oak (as some assert) but crowfoot (as
others prefer) as a remedy. Barbarian panthers (as Tully relates) have a certain [Marginal note: Tullius]
remedy for poisoned meat, by using which they do not die. Stags also, after
a fight with serpents, hasten to springs of water: so that they may quench their
thirst, stirred up by the poisonous breath. Again, the wise man sends the lazy to the ant, which
with such great care fortifies its granary, foreseeing the coming winter,
so that it may be seen to flourish with the greatest prudence. The stork (as it is said) cleanses its intest-
ines. The camel, duly loaded, rises, refusing to be loaded further because it knows
it cannot bear it. However, since there are infinite such examples in animals,
much more ought it to be found in man endowed with mind. But some have judged such a prudent regi-
men expedient: that they rejected external medicines: just as
Pliny relates concerning Asclepiades: who, having cast aside all medicines, and having reduced all medi- [Marginal note: Ascle: Plinius.]
cine to its fundamental principles, professed five things as the most common aids.
Abstinence from food, sometimes from wine, body friction, walks, and
rides: which everyone can provide for themselves. Others praise sweats induced
by exercise in healthy people, and by multiple clothes in the sick. And many such things are com-
mended by some, which we can bring about with a certain prudence, together with the favor of nature.
Which Plato also teaches in Timaeus. Diseases, he says (unless they are most
dangerous) are not to be irritated by drugs: but are to be corrected and
managed with diligence: as leisure is given to each. He also highly praises move-
ment for preserving health, and healing the body from illness. But (he says) in healing the
body, let it imitate that nature, which we call the nurse of the universe: so that it never allows it to be
sluggish: but always moves it with continuous agitation, with internal and external movements, every-
where resisting according to nature, with a certain moderate commotion, bringing back in turn into order the wandering affections of the
body and the parts of its kinship, with reason preserved. He considers the best
of all movements to be that which comes from oneself, because it is most akin to the mind. But
that which is done by another is worse. Therefore, of all purifications and constitutions of the
body, that which is gymnastic is the most wholesome. Next to this comes easy
riding, whether it is done by ship or by any other vehicle. Prudence, therefore, is sought
not only in such most useful aids, easily acquired by the prudent:
but also that it may curb gluttony, and guard against superfluous and harmful foods. It would be
best (although it is most difficult) for everyone to know how much food would suffice for them,
and not to take more, so as to avoid superfluous humors: just as some assert concerning Christ: [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.]
who took food with such a measure: so that he would not generate superfluity of the fourth digestion.
Many others also rejoiced in moderation of food, and at the same time in health and a certain agility of
body. Moses and Elijah prolonged their fast up to the fortieth day. [Marginal note: Moses.]
                                                                                                   VV iij

--- Page 821 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

protracted: whence he shone in face, his body now purified; and he was carried in a light and fiery chariot; and he easily guided his body as if it were a certain spirit at
[Marginal note: Hieron.] will. Jerome boasted that he had learned to endure weeks of fasting, yet robust in mind and body. Many others, observing the greatest abstinences, were content with only nature's sustenance, entirely renouncing all delight in food,
[Marginal note: Hilario. Macha. Francisc.] such as Hilarion, Macarius, Francis, and very many others, feeling no loss of mind or body thereby, but rather the greatest strength and vigor. This happens both by divine favor and by keen prudence, by which man moderates the appetites of the body, and, raising the body itself to be a symbol of the spirit, in a certain way feeds it with better food, namely, that of the spirit, and with the delight of due temperance and harmony with its presiding spirit: so that food may be for sustenance, and not for pleasure. But since this is very difficult to know, some, afflicting their bodies with greater fasting than they ought, have suffered manifest and various harms thereby. For a great investigation of prudence is required here, so that, like a good musician, one may draw and adapt all the strings with just modulation, lest, stretched more or less than is fitting, they rather detract from harmonies than produce them. Nor indeed is less skill and acumen required in judging the harmony of the body's limbs and in moderating them, so that all things may be tempered with the spirit and soul, than a musician requires in tuning his instruments. But since perfect knowledge of such a matter cannot be had except by the most perfect: therefore, everyone ought to consult those more skilled. Who, if not all things, at least teach some things to be guarded against, until, having attained understanding, one arrives at a perfect knowledge of one's own dwelling, the indwelling soul, the guarding intelligence, and all things pertaining to the perfecting of the soul itself, and to the perfect tempering of the body, and its consummate harmony with the soul.

**How much true self-knowledge avails each person for achieving these things. Chapter VII.**

[Large decorative initial E]XISTS a monument most celebrated by the wise, by which man can moderate his own body, and all things that are within the body, and that lie around it. But this is proper self-knowledge, not indeed, that one is earth, or born from vile matter, or soon to be resolved into earth, and living mingled with innumerable questions, as some interpret that monument: But it is required that one know what one's own soul is, whence it proceeds, with how many and what degrees of perfection it is filled, by what intelligence it is fortified, by what means it is diffused into the body, by what harmony it is bound with the body itself, what affinity it has with God, intelligences, heavens, elements, and all things, whose image and likeness it holds: And by what influences the body is constructed, and by what course of life it is to be terminated, beyond which no further progress is given. For these things and suchlike, the monument requires

--- Page 822 ---
**Previous page text for continuity:**
...how much the musician seeks in tempering his instruments, when they are united with spirit and soul. But since perfect knowledge of such a matter cannot be had except from the most perfect, therefore everyone ought to consult those more skilled. Who, if not all, at least teach some things to be guarded against, until, having attained a mind, one reaches perfect knowledge of one's own dwelling, of the indwelling soul, of the guarding intelligence, and of all things that pertain to perfecting the soul itself, and to the perfect tempering of the body, and the consummate harmony of the body with the soul.

**How true self-knowledge avails each person for achieving these things. Chapter VII.**

[Large decorative initial E]XISTS a monument most celebrated by the wise, by which a person may be able to moderate their own body, and all things that are within the body, and that lie around it. This, however, is proper self-knowledge, not indeed, that one is earth, or born from vile matter, or soon to be resolved into earth, and living mixed with innumerable questions, as some interpret that monument: But it is sought that one may know what one's own soul is, whence it proceeds, with how many and what degrees of perfection it is filled, by what intelligence it is fortified, by what means it is diffused into the body, by what harmony it is compacted with the body itself, what affinity it has with God, intelligences, heavens, elements, and all things, whose image and likeness it holds: And by what influences the body is joined together, and by what course of life it is to be terminated, beyond which no progress is given. For these and such like, the monument seeks [to understand]

TONE ONE. 341

that which Greece boasts to have received from the Delphic oracle on the most ancient tripod before all others. [marginal note: Oracle.]
Nor, however, should praise be given to the speaking oracle, as if to the inventor of that teaching, since before Apollo's oracle, those who had been taught by the Holy Spirit handed it down:
for Job says, "visiting your form, you will not sin." [marginal note: Job]
For he visits his own form, who at some time contemplates his own proper form and himself with his mind.
Which is necessary, if he wishes to arrange all parts of himself, like the strings of a whole instrument, in their proper place, and to restore himself to his own dignity. [marginal note: David]
Concerning which the divine Harper thunders with a clear voice, saying: "Man, when he was in honor, did not understand; he was compared to senseless beasts, and became like them."
For he grieves that man does not recognize the dignity and excellence in which he is established, surpassing all, and able to receive nourishment for his dignity from all things, since he can rejoice not only in the harmony of all his own parts, but in the harmony and subjection of all things, unless, casting himself down, he is likened to senseless beasts.
And these (if I am not mistaken) are those wonders, concerning the knowledge of which the prophet elsewhere exults, when he says: "Wonderful are your works, and my soul knows them full well." [marginal note: The same.]
And explaining what these wonders are, and concerning whom they are, he adds: "But to me, your friends, O God, are exceedingly honored; their dominion is exceedingly strengthened:" knowing, namely, with what great excellence of nature and gifts you have adorned them, and over what great dominion you have placed them, namely, those who have known and striven to preserve the value and dignity in which they are established.
And lest anyone boast of outward appearance, but always fear and revere God's judgment, to whose standard man is truly great or small, and is good or bad, he says:
"My bone was not hidden from you, which you made in secret: and my substance, or my compacting, in the lower parts of the earth. Your eyes saw my imperfect being." [marginal note: Mercurius]
Mercurius Trismegistus also taught the same, before the oracle, saying: "You, to whom a portion of mind has been granted, recognize your lineage, and consider your immortal nature."
Therefore, this wise man does not command a mortal or inferior condition to be contemplated, but a better one: [marginal note: Macrobius]
Which Macrobius, explaining in 'On Scipio's Dream', says: "We say that souls have fallen from heaven into bodies, and that this is perfect wisdom of the soul, that while it uses the body, it recognizes whence it originated."
For thus all right-thinking people wish that that knowledge be sought, through which, with impediments excluded, the straight path to God may be taken.
Hence they judged that the oracle emanated from heaven rather than from a demon, as the Satirist sings: "From heaven descended 'know thyself'." [marginal note: Juvenal]
Indeed, from heaven and from the Holy Spirit sprang forth the teaching, as we have said: although it was uttered by a demon through the oracle to the Greeks.
Therefore, having obtained this knowledge of ourselves, we know God, in whose image we are made: we know the world, whose likeness we bear: we know all creatures, which we embrace, and with whom we have a symbol and harmonic proportion:
we know what nourishment we can draw from stones, what from herbs, what from the heavens, and finally what from each and every thing.
Moreover, we know how each one
VV v.

--- Page 823 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**
and how we may be able to fit the string of our bodily instrument in its proper place.

That the body, and consequently the whole man, may be tempered and strengthened by celestial favor. Chapter VIII.

[Large decorative initial E] ND because diseases are sometimes fatal (as Plato asserted in Timaeus), ending at certain periods of time from the very beginning of generation, and following the motions of the great animal: therefore disease must be tempered, and virtue strengthened by celestial favor, by those however, who, having fallen into a lower harmony, have become the most wretched servants of the heavens and of other inferior things (as Trismegistus says). [Mercur.] For some there were,
and are found, to whom it is said through Jeremiah: [Ieremi.] "Be not dismayed at the signs of heaven, as the nations are dismayed, because neither heaven, nor earth, nor any corporeal things, but the Lord Himself is immediately the portion and inheritance of those," to whom again the same Prophet says: "Do not fear these things, for they can do neither evil nor good." With whom we will speak in its proper place: but for now, with those who are subject to the heavens: to whom we say, that until they are freed from their presidency, they should take care, like wise Astronomers, not only to guard against the many evils that the heavens threaten (as Ptolemy teaches) [Ptolem.] but continuously draw favor and protection, until they are freed from the
[Plotino.] presidency of the heavens. This drawing [of favor] occurs (as Plotinus teaches) through the World Soul, which, containing as many seminal reasons as there are ideas in the divine mind, bestows upon each individual its particular power, according to the virtues of the ideas received, just as it also bestows life. For there is no member in this mundane animal so deformed, to which (as the [Platonici] Platonists asserted) the gift of both soul and life is not inherent. These connections of life, [Zoroast.] Zoroaster calls divine allurements: and Synesius [Syne.] symbolic charms: According to which, not all good things arise simultaneously from heaven: but according to the courses of time, and opportunity, and according to each one's aptitude and disposition. Therefore, by this [World Soul] being introduced, the prepared person receives favor from the stars and the presiding intelligence, suitable to himself, just as an organized body, brought to its ultimate disposition, receives life and soul. For we see that through the succession of time, and many and various revolutions of the heavens, humans greatly advance in the augmentations and expansions of life, soul, reason, and many gifts: which cannot be brought about by the aids of art and industry: so much so that we are compelled to confess celestial favor. This has often been proven by diligent observation: although prognosticators are sometimes mistaken: either because they do not fully understand all the influxes and whence they arise: or because man, by his own free will and liberty of mind, tends elsewhere than the celestial
[Ptolem.] influx itself dictates. For (as Ptolemy himself, the prince of Astronomers, teaches in the beginning of the Apotelesmata) it is not enough for someone to be chaste and just, to have Jupiter favoring in his horoscope: unless he guards against pimps and prostitutes, whose company obstructs the influx. For customs, morals, bloodline, place of birth, freedom of mind, and very many circumstances obstruct, since those influxes do not compel, but

--- Page 824 ---
TONVS PRIMVS. 342

dispose and favor. And this (as we have said) through the soul of the world, particularly by the virtue of images and presiding intelligences, and by the confluence of rays and aspects, with those stars and images being suitable, by a certain peculiar and harmonious agreement. And the virtue of all these is cherished by the sun as by the true rooster of heaven, which pours forth both the common force of life and the seeds of particular virtues. By the virtue of whose seed the stars, being made pregnant, especially the Moon, in its own time diffuses its offspring into us, as a womb, not only of the sun, but also of other planets. From all of which the seed and influences received from higher sources, a domestic mother, as it were, bestows upon us. Hence, with more diligent care, the female herself is observed by all. Which we can learn and prove in the lesser world, and in ourselves. For in the heart of man, which holds the image and virtue of the sun, is the common fount of life, and the virtue of all the members of the whole body. For all things that are in the body receive nourishment from the heart, and the force of life and motion, which passes from the heart to the brain, which is lunar, and thence is diffused to all members of the body through veins and nerves descending from it. Therefore, following the Platonists, [Marginal note: Plato.] who agree in common opinion that the world is an animal, more one than anything else whatsoever, we say that the universal and particular members are connected in the same way, and are equal, and very similar, in influx, and mutual communication, in motion, quality, and every kind of correspondence. For it influences in both cases, especially the principal member, which is the sun in the mundane animal, and the heart in the particular. And the other superior members of both influence the inferior ones, according to the disposition of those receiving. Which is both inborn by nature, and is aided by the helps of prudence and art. But this, which is acquired by industry, even if slight, suffices for receiving the gifts of heaven, therefore not to be despised, since it contributes much both to the natural disposition, that it may be full, and to the disposing soul, since it itself favors by disposing, just as the celestial influences. And although man receives favor from the whole heaven, yet he draws most especially from the heart of heaven, which is the sun, since man is solar (as Arab astronomers say) [Marginal note: Arabes] and adorned with a certain peculiar gift of both suns, namely the celestial and the supermundane, as we gather from the theology of the Hebrews. [Marginal note: The. he.] Which also teaches his beautiful and upright stature, subtle humor, clear spirit, keen imagination, zeal for truth and glory, and many things, in which man has the symbol of both suns, and their peculiar image, and the more expressed, the more perfect he is. Hence the prince and head of men, Christ Jesus, is called the sun in many places: from the fullness of whose light, life, and all good things (says John) [Marginal note: Ioan.] we have all received. We also draw from other planets and stars, but by the virtue of the sun cherishing them with its own seed, or by its virtue. Just as in the mystical body (although we receive principally from the heart or head, Christ) yet also by His virtue, from other members, which are like stars in the great mystical body, as Daniel and Paul testify. [Marginal note: Daniel, Paulus] Therefore, in the sun, the principal lamp of the world, as in the heart, is especially the life of the mundane animal, whose also

--- Page 825 ---
CANTICI TERTII

It itself is the chief giver among the celestial members, through a certain vital spirit: by which (as Timaeus the Pythagorean says) the whole world lives, continually drawing it in, together with the spirit and virtue of other stars: especially man through its spirit, naturally conformed to them, and by art and providence, made a kinship, by many rules and aids, concerning which they treat more by the mouth of a true wise man than by volumes. And man receives a more renowned power, not only from the stars and intelligences, but from the very source of all good things: the more celestial, angelic, and divine he becomes. But he becomes celestial when, subduing and despising corruptible things, he embraces incorruptible things: and he leads his mind and works, as it were a certain heaven, into its orbit, reflecting his journey and work into heaven, from which he proceeded. Which cannot happen unless by a prior segregation from obscuring vapors: and from all those things which render man unlike heaven. He also becomes angelic while he serves God with a clean and pure mind, and always delights in clean things, in his inner parts, in his skin, in his clothes, in his dwellings, and in his utensils: the uncleanness of all of which frequently infects the air: and disturbs that most clean influx of celestial and divine things, and puts to flight the clean ministers of God. But sometimes mundane angels, as apes of God and His ministers, either that they may be adored, or that they may deceive, seek this kind of cleanliness. Therefore, above all things, it must be observed with diligent care: that everyone may have a pure and clean mind and heart, which puts to flight unclean powers, and disposes one to God's familiarity and fellowship,
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
the supreme truth saying: Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Therefore, this cleanliness being first acquired, also that of the body and of all those things which we use is not to be despised: since God, the fount and origin of all pure things, to whom we tend, requires both. For He requires that first, saying through Isaiah: Wash yourselves, and be clean, take away the evil of your thoughts. He also requires this, since He always demands all things clean in sacred rites, both vessels: and offerings: and victims, and sacrifices: And, to conclude briefly, there is a doctrine
[Marginal note: Hebrews]
among the Hebrews, most skilled in such matters, common to all, that all things which are of God are held to be part of the cleanliness which they call טהרה (taharah), And all things which are of unclean spirits, and pertain to them, or their members, he calls טומאה (tumah), that is, unclean, or impure: just as they themselves are called unclean spirits, Conversely, however, those are called angels of light, and clean. Hence, those who delight in their
[Marginal note: Francis]
fellowship, seek all kinds of cleanliness. Among whom Francis, our guide, by a certain learned practice: and imbued with the illumination of the divine spirit, commended cleanliness in a wonderful way. Therefore, whoever has been made clean, and most like the angels, strives to direct others to God by a clean path and a pure life. This one, also in a certain way transcending the heavens, no longer from them, but from the angels receives increments of life, progress, and nourishment, enjoying a certain familiar fellowship with them: just as we read concerning many of the Fathers of both testaments. For
[Marginal note: Abraham]
[Marginal note: Jacob]
Abraham had angels as messengers of desired offspring, and of many things. Jacob-

--- Page 826 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 343

cob often used the familiarity of angels throughout his entire pilgrimage. Elias [Marginal note: Elias:] was fed by an angelic hand no less in mind than in body. Peter also [Marginal note: Petrus.] felt an angel as a deliverer from prison, and a companion: until he left the city and escaped dangers. John rejoiced many times in the companionship of an angel, by whom he was also [Marginal note: Ioannes.] taught a most famous vision. And omitting very many others, I will briefly explain myself: To Moses (says Paul) the law was given through angels, acting very [Marginal note: Moses. Paulus] familiarly with him. Yet not content merely with their favor, patronage, and custom, aspiring to divinity, he sought God as the leader of his journey, protesting to Him with great confidence and saying: "Unless You come with us, I will not go." God therefore strove to protect His clients with such divine power: that they might not fear the influences of the heavens at all: as it says in Deuteronomy. The Gentiles listen to diviners and [Marginal note: Deuter.] `mehonenim` (מעוננים), which our people have as augurs: but calculators, as [Marginal note: Achinās.] Achinas says. But you have been otherwise instructed by your God. And He deemed it sufficient to have obtained for them an oracle, and a domestic God, from whom they could opportunely draw all things by due and most sacred worship. Which the true referrer of the law, [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] Christ Jesus, still better accomplished, teaching how we could draw God, not into a tabernacle made by hand, but into ourselves, made temples of the living God and palaces of the heavenly kingdom, and host Him in them, saying: "We will come to him, and make our dwelling with him." Moreover, He taught and gave the faculty by which we can awaken God, who is within us, to our favor: indeed, to change ourselves into Him, as John [Marginal note: Ioan.] says: "He gave them the power to become children of God." Which Christians of our time neither do nor know: because the evangelical monuments are so obliterated and neglected: that their traces and outlines are barely visible. Behold then, how you can receive favor from God, from His ministering angels, and from the heavens, His instruments. Now, learn how you may do this by a short and easy path.

By what short way we can draw favor from heaven, angels, and God. Chapter IX.

[Decorative initial 'E' within a square frame depicting a landscape with a celestial sphere or sun above] It would certainly be a long, arduous, and overly doubtful journey, if we wished to hunt for all the stars, and their influences, and favorable aspects, and through them to know who or what kind our guardian or genius is: since the professors of that doctrine have handed down long, very difficult, doubtful, and sometimes conflicting precepts. For Porphyry [Marginal note: Porphy.] seeks the genius from the planet ruling the nativity. Firmicus also [Marginal note: Iul. Fir.] seeks it either from there, or from him who has more dignities there: or from him whose domicile the moon is immediately about to enter, after the sign which it holds at the birth of a person. The Chaldeans [Marginal note: Chaldęi] rather auspicate the genius from the sun or from the moon. Others teach to seek it from some cardinal point of the heavens. And thus the professors of this doctrine wander through many things: either because they have not fully known the sacraments and order of the heavens: or because they have not wished to reveal and make common those things which are to be communicated among a few wise men. Since therefore that path, long and most hidden

--- Page 827 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

...is, a short journey must be undertaken, by inquiring of ourselves what we cannot do from the heavens. Indeed, we will do this if, with obstacles removed, we submit ourselves to our guiding spirit, who, if we do not resist, will show us the way to heaven, to our genius, indeed to where the supreme moderator leads. And this, if we pay attention to those things which, undisturbed by any corruptions from our earliest age, it suggests to us, or what, with a mind purified from vain care and perverse affection, we feel, imagine, imitate, and attempt more frequently, nature itself or the spirit dictating.

For nature feels: and our spirit feels the instinct and favor of heaven: it also feels the persuasions of its own genius: which is given to each person from the beginning of their birth: [Marginal note: Plato.] as not only the Platonists assert along with [Marginal note: Our Teachers (CHRIST).] our teachers, but infallible Truth openly declares in speech, when it says: "Their angels always see the face of the Father." For these (angels) favor their clients, leading them to where their star also inclines. Always indeed to good: unless man, deceived by these allurements, or by the persuasions of an evil demon, deviates from his path. For he who walks astray truly has no guide for his journey: because it is the duty of the stars and our guardians always to act rightly: and to dispose us towards what is right and more excellent. Therefore, assenting to the persuasions of heaven, and of one's genius, or proper angel (to speak catholically), one will act prosperously and live happily. Otherwise, one will feel heaven and the powers above to be hostile: and adverse fortune (which is the guidance of the divine ones) in all things to be done, having become estranged from the celestial patrons. To which perhaps [Marginal note: Zoroaster.] that adage refers: "Do nothing against Minerva's will." And thus (as Zoroaster teaches) fate is not to be increased, much less changed. For if you undertake something by your own will, against your genius and the continually inviting voice of the celestial beings: you will labor in vain, as [Marginal note: David] the prophet says: "Unless the Lord guards the city, he who guards it watches in vain. And unless the Lord builds the house, they have labored in vain who build it." For it is vain for us to rise by ourselves, either before, or against the light that shines from heaven: and leads, and guides man, where he ought to go. Therefore, for those seeking a propitious omen for things to be done, it must be observed with all diligence: that we listen to what God speaks within us: or in His holy scripture and law: what the good guardian persuades, what the spirit suggests, and to what the star is favorable. Attention must also be paid to where they lead you. For place contributes much, because not without [Marginal note: GOD] reason did God, or the good guardian in His stead and name, say to Abraham: "Go to the land which I will show you, and I will make you into a great nation: and I will bless you, and I will magnify your name": where it is clearly understood how much place contributes to favor. And a little later it follows: "Abraham went forth, going and further advancing, or progressing towards the south." There he felt the most ample supercelestial favor: just as [Marginal note: Isaac.] Isaac in the north, of whom it is said: "Isaac came to Gerar, where he sowed, and reaped a hundredfold": or "a hundred measures of barley": as the literal truth has it. And the man became rich: and became very wealthy. Jerome seeks the mystery of this matter, but does not solve it: perhaps unwilling to reveal to the unworthy common people what place accomplishes, what barley signifies, by which Isaac so greatly prospered and grew, that

--- Page 828 ---
                      TONVS  PRIMVS.                      344

...so that he became very rich. David also chose Zion as a special dwelling, saying:   [Marginal note: Dauid]
"This is my rest for ever and ever; here I will dwell, for I have chosen it." Nor indeed
anything of these things was written without a hidden meaning. But what your place is, if by rea-
son or doctrine you cannot find it, observe where your spirit is most especially refreshed:
where your senses become more vigorous, where the health and agility of your body improve, where your vows
succeed, where most people favor you, where your enemies succumb. Know that this region
has been prepared for you by God and the heavenly powers. Cultivate this without any superstition,
having as the most excellent guides for this observance Christ especially, who frequented   [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
the Mount of Olives. Jerome also revered the Bethlehem manger.   [Marginal note: Hiero.]
Francis loved the place of Saint Mary of the Angels: And many other men full of God   [Marginal note: Francif.]
[loved] particular places for themselves.

--- Page 829 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

leading to God's sovereignty. How much also the change of garments avails we can learn from the same scripture, which commands that priests and ministers of God, about to perform sacred rites, should be clothed in certain suitable and there determined garments. In like manner, how much the foods to be taken avail, we are instructed by the same [scripture]: which with the greatest diligence teaches its initiates from which foods they should abstain, and which they should admit. Thus also it commands them to abstain from the custom of diverse nations, whose customs and rites it forbids, even with an added threat. Therefore, customs, garments, ways of life, exercises, and names must be changed, with a changed profession and rank: because then we also assume a nobler guardian and director. For this progress has been given to us, that we may be able to ascend from degree to degree, and from virtue to virtue: until we see the God of Gods in Zion. Whoever, therefore, has known his place, work, profession, star, genius, and spirit, possesses the surest pledge of his progress and happiness.

How man, a small world, can receive support from all members of the greater world (to which he is most similar). Chapter X.

[Decorative initial N] Nor only from heaven, angels, and intelligences, but from any member of the mundane body, we receive no small favor and protection. For man is divided by some wise men into five parts: into the intellectual, the rational, the irascible, the appetitive, and the senses, with all their instruments. The intellect, placed in the highest citadel, alone intimate with the supreme prince, draws from him what neither reason nor the senses can draw: since God himself and his ministers are not subject to the judgment of our senses, unless insofar as they themselves wish to be shown through sensible images, by their own will. Nor are they perceived by reason, except the movers of the spheres through their motion: as [Marginal note: Aristor.] Aristotle and other natural philosophers investigate. Much less is God perceived by sense or reason, except only His being. But if we perceive any secrets concerning God and his [Marginal note: Plato.] ministers, we do so by that supreme portion which the Platonists call intellect, distinct from reason. And this, by means of a certain divine light, by which [Marginal note: Dauid] the intellect itself, or that superior portion, is infused. Concerning which light the prophet says: 'In your light, we shall see light.' The rational [part], however, also placed on a higher throne, midway between the intellect and imagination, receives increase from all things about which it discourses: it is expanded by celestial, terrestrial, and human things, and especially by the presence of man, and is sharpened like iron by iron, as is the common adage. The irascible [part], dwelling in the abode of the heart, does not much need external favor, being sufficiently inflamed by the heart itself and bile, unless insofar as it externally receives the object at which it is angry. The appetitive faculty (Cupido), however, is twofold: one in the heart, which, supported by reason, is carried towards all things about which reason discourses: and from these very things, from which it is expanded and increased, it receives. But most especially from the supreme object of love, God: provided that it is led to Him through the intellect, illuminated by His light. The other, bound in the lower seats, and far removed from wisdom and reason, is constituted: lest

--- Page 830 ---
TOMVS PRIMVS. 345

troublesome proximity would disturb reason and all higher things. He receives so much increase of a true human from things, as much as he is obedient to and bound by the higher things themselves. But the means by which the higher appetite is fostered are institutions and teachings, which are contained in right laws and doctrines, especially in sacred writings, where all things are contained which pertain to directing and cultivating him. There are also sacred rites, by which he is purified, so that he may grow stronger. Finally, the senses, as ministers of reason and will, receive from all sensible things that by which they may delight, and may favor their protectors. For hearing, a participant of air, and an organ of those things which cannot be apprehended by other senses, a most accurate organ, and a magnificent minister of higher things, serves for acquiring wisdom, before all other senses. For it measures the rhythms of speech and all harmony, and the modes of things and of all discourse; from which it can itself become a modulator, and a musician, and semi-rational, since it alone among the senses perceives the discourses of reason. Also from composite and artificial instruments, and from the harmony of the world, which it perceives with better hearing, it receives wonderful delights and instructions, from which man composes himself, as the Platonists and Pythagoreans assert. With the eyes also it measures the sky, the most harmonious circuits of stars and constellations, their settings and risings, the most beautiful picture of the earth, the fertility of waters, and the composition of all visible things; from which the most abundant fount of philosophy is imbibed, from which one arrives at higher wisdom. No less nourishment for both aspects of man is gathered from there than doctrine. But between the eyes and ears, nature has placed the nostrils in the middle region of the face, by whose harmony odor passes with breath. These, receiving solace from well-smelling and well-composed things, also provide no small gain to man. The mouth also, in the middle of the face, fortified with teeth, palate, and tongue, bestows manifold profit upon man. For it receives all bodily nourishments, to be brought into the belly, as into a kind of storehouse, and into the whole body. But first they are committed to the judgment of the palate, so that it may reject harmful things and admit beneficial ones. And these the teeth chew, so that the food, now ground, may be presented to the cauldron of the stomach, easily to be digested. For the turning over of which food, the tongue is given, which also serves the spirit and soul no less than the body, bringing forth in speech what prudence and the heart conceive: so that it may both bestow benefit upon one's neighbor, and receive advantages from the same, indeed from higher beings, and from God himself, and acquire much wisdom through discussion. What therefore remains in the whole machine, from which man does not receive benefit through ears, eyes, nostrils, mouth, tongue, or mind? For nothing escapes but is subjected to the judgment of one of them. For those things which reject touch, sight, smell, and taste, are at least perceived by the ears and handled by the tongue: since these (tongues) can speak of all things, and those (ears) can hear of all things, whether sensible or intellectual. Hence hearing is the sense serving the intellect before all others, and its peculiar minister. After which are three other senses, placed in the royal court of the head, in the sight of reason: so that by its balance, all their judgment may be weighed. Touch
XX
[Marginal note: Plato. Pythag.]

--- Page 831 ---
**THIRD SONG**

indeed, it is left to the animal parts: so that, with these more solid and more material things being grasped by it, nothing may be left that escapes human judgment, and from which man himself does not receive sustenance. And if there is anything that the senses do not perceive, he contemplates it at least with the mind. [Marginal note: Mercur.] For Mercurius proposed these things to his son Tatius for consideration, saying: "Note this, my son, that each genus of living beings inhabits its own province of the world. Wet creatures, indeed, inhabit water: terrestrial creatures, earth: winged creatures, air: but man uses all of these, earth, water, air, fire, and whatever is contained in them. Moreover, he looks up at the heavens, and touches them with his senses: but God himself, with his mind and intellect. And because he has a proportion and a symbol with all things: therefore he understands all things, and draws from all things a symbolic power, from which he may be nourished and grow. But he receives growth in two ways: From God, indeed, as the creator and begetter, as from a Father providing all nourishment, he is fed: but from other things, as from food prepared by the Father for his support and nourishment." To which [Marginal note: Aristotle] the Leader of the Peripatetics assented, when he said: "We are in a certain way the end of all things." [Marginal notes: Simplicius, Thomas] Nor does the opinion of Simplicius and Thomas please, that the statement should be understood only of artificial things, and that it made us the end only of artificial things, and not of others. [Marginal note: Aristotle] For he himself, explaining himself at the beginning of the Politics, says: "It is to be considered that plants exist for the sake of animals, and animals themselves for the sake of man: for domestic animals, that is, tame animals, which the Hebrews call בהמות *behemot*, are for use and sustenance: and wild animals, even if not all, yet most are held for our sustenance and convenience: from which clothes and many other things are supplied." And if nature makes nothing either imperfect or in vain, there is no one who does not know that these things were made for the sake of man. And although Aristotle himself would not admit that the heavens were made for man, since he prefers them to man in the Ethics: [Marginal note: Idem] nevertheless, as much as we can learn from sacred scripture, and from those who think correctly, they themselves were created for the service of man: granted that they receive God's influence more immediately. For they influence lower things, so that they may favor man without other mediation: or plants and animals, which are already conceded to be ordered for the service of man. Therefore, man receives increments of his progress from all things, provided he knows how to use all things and to dominate all things: just as it was instilled in him by the Creator, as we shall discuss in its proper place (with God himself favoring).

On the soul's agreement with itself. Chapter XI.

[Decorative initial N] And so that the soul may not dissent from anything, but receive sustenance from all things, [Marginal note: Origen] agreement with itself is necessary. For just as we feel (says Origen) the torment of immense pain, when the members of the body are dissolved, and torn apart from their mutual connections: so it is when the soul is found outside the order and connection by which it was created by God for harmony, for acting well, and for perceiving usefully. Whence, with the connection of rational movements dissolved, it inflicts punishment and torment upon itself. And the punishment for this disorder, all senses and all members, deprived or disordered

--- Page 832 ---
**FIRST TONE. 346**

suffer, which ought to be ruled by the soul itself. Therefore, the soul must be cared for through true philosophy, and studies of truth, indeed commonly hidden: through sacrifices, and all suitable expiations: so that, restored to health, strengthened by truth, and fortified by such safeguards, it may fear nothing (as Chalcidius discusses in a long discourse) the arising commotions: [Marginal note: Chalcid.] but, agreeing with itself, may then agree with other things: and may friendly receive from all things safeguards for its own growth: Nor indeed can it, disagreeing with itself, agree with others: nor perceive the harmonious symbol of others. For he who (says Proculus) [Marginal note: Proculus] fights with himself, certainly cannot agree with others: nor truly delight in others, or receive nourishment from them. Indeed, from discord it has whence it always pays the penalty for its error, as Augustine says. [Marginal note: August.] "You have commanded, O Lord, and so it is, that every disordered soul is a punishment to itself." To which they assent in different words, but e

--- Page 833 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

And the inventor of medicine is celebrated, not only of the body, but also of the soul. But the truer and super-mundane Apollo accomplishes this much better, resounding with a superior harmony, to which this artificial or natural harmony is far inferior, and even a dark image. For he himself provided and taught to give perfect health and balance to both parts of man, through those things which the experienced and wisest physician judged suitable for our infirmity and for tempering all parts: so much so, that all effort can be considered vain by which another doctrine or way, or rule, is determined or devised for instructing and perfecting the human race, than that which was delivered as most perfect by Christ.

But just as in healing bodies, harmony contributes so much, that not only natural, but also vocal harmony has brought healing, [Marginal note: Democ. Theoph. Pythag. Emped. Asclepia. Dauid Boëtius Terpan. Hisme,] as Democritus and Theophrastus seem to affirm; and Pythagoras and Empedocles, together with Asclepiades, demonstrate with words; which David and others proved by their deeds. For he cured Saul, raging with an evil spirit, with song and lyre. And as Boethius relates, Terpander and Arion of Methymna rescued the Lesbians and Ionians, afflicted with very severe diseases, by the aid of song. Hismenias the Theban is said to have wiped away all troubles by his melody for very many Boeotians whom the torments of sciatic pain afflicted. Many others also are recounted as healed by sensible harmony, [Marginal note: Boëtius] both by Boethius himself and by others. Therefore, natural harmony ought rightly to do this, being certainly stronger and more excellent than artificial harmony.

That (natural harmony) consists in the proportion and tempering of medicines to each other, and with the qualities of the body to which they are administered. Therefore, medicines ought to be tempered to each other and with the body, if they are to bring alleviation and the balance of health. [Marginal note: Demasc. Antiqui.] Hence, it was the most diligent care of Damascenus and other ancients who treat of such matters, in proportioning and tempering medicines, assigning in their mixture just and harmonious weights, leaving to the physicians administering them the care of proportioning them to the bodies they intend to heal. Which many ignorant people in this age, despising (this care), too often inflict such dissonance upon the internal organs: so that they shudder, grieve, and are tormented by the dissonance of the medicine, when a consonant temperament and health should have been brought about.

Nor otherwise ought virtues, which are the medicines of the soul, to be tempered among themselves and with the soul, if they are to bring health and delight to the soul itself. [Marginal note: Theolo. Thomas Henricus Scotus.] Our theologians dispute at length about the connection and structure of virtues: namely Thomas, Henry, John Scotus, and others. Since this connection cannot be made without harmonic agreement, setting aside whatever they may have thought about the connection of all or some particular ones, we will speak of our harmonic agreement. [Marginal note: Boëtius.] For just as vocal harmony (as Boethius defines it) is the concord of equal and unequal voices reduced to one, so the harmony perfecting the soul is the consensus of equal and unequal virtues reduced to one. For unequal virtues are liberality and faith, Frugality and hope, contemplation and the diligent work of charity in frequent ministry, and many of this kind. Which nevertheless all

--- Page 834 ---
TONVS PRIMVS.                                 347
...Which nevertheless all converge into one accord: otherwise they cannot be considered virtues, but vices.
But that into which all must converge is charity, and the love of God and neighbor: in which, as in the root, foundation, life, and soul of all virtues, all things contained in the law and the prophets are founded and depend: as the highest Truth teaches.
Which Paul also admonishes with an open voice, saying: "If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and if I have faith so as to move mountains, and prophecy, and piety in distributing my goods, and all other virtues: but if I do not have charity (into which, namely, all other virtues must converge), I am nothing but a clanging cymbal, for the utility, namely, and delight of others."

But it profits me nothing, like a cymbal, which gains no advantage for itself from its sound, but rather is consumed and worn out, although it may soothe the ears of listeners.

Indeed, there is no progress in virtues, unless it is strengthened in the root and foundation of charity.

Nor is there delight, unless all converge into one, which Plato in the Epinomis calls piety, but our Paul and his teacher Christ call charity.
And although that common thing, into which all virtues must converge, Plato himself in the Republic (whom Macrobius follows, and Ambrose also, and Lactantius) seems to assert to be justice, and (as others say) temperance, which imposes measure on all virtues: nevertheless, these do not contradict what has been said about charity.

For just as in sound there is a twofold harmony: one of strings, melodies, or pipes separately; but the other with other strings, melodies, or pipes: so that from the whole instrument, and even from several instruments, one consonance resounds. Thus
<div style="text-align: right;">CHRI</div>
<div style="text-align: right;">STVS.</div>
<div style="text-align: right;">Paulus</div>
<div style="text-align: right;">Plato,</div>
<div style="text-align: right;">Paulus</div>
<div style="text-align: right;">CHRI</div>
<div style="text-align: right;">STVS.</div>
<div style="text-align: right;">Plato.</div>
<div style="text-align: right;">Macro.</div>
<div style="text-align: right;">Ambrof.</div>
<div style="text-align: right;">Lactan.</div>

--- Page 835 ---
uaria ministeria, & uirtutes sequuntur sidera, & genios, & Deum
ipsum distribuentẽ, ut paulo antè diximus. Hinc, quãuis nulla sit cõtenenda uir-
tus, unusquisq; tamẽ eã sibi asciscere studeat, ad quã sidus, genius, natura, imò
ipse Sũmus distributor inducit. Qui Petrũ fide, Ioannem charitate, Iacobũ de-
uotione, Thomã prudentia, Abraham pietate, Mosem mansuetudine, Phineem.
& Eliam Zelo, & Dauidem religione, & robore ditauit. Vide igitur in qua
uirtute facilius proficias, & in illa uersare, & ad eius apicẽ cures cõscendere:
ut in una præstes, qui in omnibus præstare nõ potes. In aliis autẽ proficere, q̃tũ

CHRI-
STVS.

various ministries and virtues follow the stars, and genii, and God
Himself distributing, as we said a little earlier. Hence, although no virtue is to be despised,
nevertheless each one should strive to appropriate that virtue for himself, to which the star, genius, nature, indeed
the Supreme Distributor Himself leads. Who endowed Peter with faith,
Ioan. John with charity, James with devotion, Thomas with prudence, Abraham with piety, Moses with meekness, Phinehas
and Elijah with zeal, and David with religion and strength. See therefore in which
virtue you may more easily make progress, and occupy yourself in that, and take care to ascend to its peak:
so that you may excel in one, you who cannot excel in all. But to make progress in others, as much as

--- Page 836 ---
VOLUME ONE. 348

you can, do not despise [them]. In these matters, no rule can be given by which each person may measure where they have felt an easier progress of the soul. To which [progress] one arrives through that threefold kind of virtues, first described by Plotinus and most celebrated by all wise men [Marginal note: Plotin.], namely, political, purgative, and heroic. To these is added the exemplary [virtue], but this is not properly in us, but rather like a rule guiding and measuring the virtues that are in us. Therefore, that threefold kind [of virtues] brings about in us the most perfect harmony of virtues. For the political [virtue] is like the hypate, or proslambanomenos in an instrument, or a deeper and lower voice in song. The heroic [virtue] is like the nete hyperboleum, or a raised and highest voice. And the purgative kind is like the mese, that is, the middle string in an instrument, or the middle voices in song. And (as musicians teach) from proslambanomenos to mese is a diapason, and from there to nete hyperboleum, another diapason: and in both cases, perfect harmony. Thus, a person ascending from civil virtues is elevated to purgative ones, as if by the first diapasonic harmony; but carried from purgative to heroic virtues, another diapason brings about indeed the most consummate harmony. And how virtues make the soul harmonious, Plotinus, deservedly the foremost among philosophers of this doctrine [Marginal note: Idem.], explains quite clearly, saying: In man, two motions occur, disturbing the soul: Some, indeed, are certain unconsidered animal impulses, whether they are inciting or terrifying. The others, however, are when we deliberately and intentionally pursue those motions. Therefore, civil virtues temper these second motions with prudence and deliberation: so that one does not admit that which reason judges to be evil. Introducing this temperament, they begin to harmonize the soul. But purgative [virtues] not only curb those motions, but extirpate and eradicate them: and they so suppress the primary motions that the mere presence of reason, namely the mistress of the appetites, suffices to suppress them. These purgative virtues, when they have entirely freed the soul from those disturbances, render the instrument of the soul most temperate, so that nothing remains but to undertake a harmonious and excellent song and work. When the soul accomplishes this, applying itself to the greatest advancements, it becomes a hero. Again, political virtues compose our animal nature, or the outer man. Purgative [virtues], as if through the first diapason, purify the spirit and render it harmonious, so that man is called spiritual, and is so. But heroic [virtues] elevate the mind to the supreme harmony: uniting man with intelligences, indeed with God himself. To this Aristotle agrees [Marginal note: Ariſto.], saying that men are made Gods through excellence of virtue. But our Plotinus continues [Marginal note: Ploti.], saying that the aim and vow of the Heroic is not only to be free from sin, but to be God, and to return whence it proceeded: just as He who said: "I came forth from the Father and have come into the world; again, I leave the world and go to the [Marginal note: CHRISTUS.] Father [Marginal note: John.]." And since we are His brothers, having proceeded from the same Father, we must return to the same [Father]: though at a lower degree. But when we return whence we came, we complete a perfect diapason: in which the tone returns to the same [note] from which it had departed: although with a different key, as musicians say. So also we have emanated—
XX iiij

--- Page 837 ---
CANTICI TERTII

...ted from God, as from a productive principle: and we return to the same, but for another reason, namely, the beatifying end. Therefore, man (to follow the proposition from the mind of Plotinus), if he admits something erroneous, merely by inadvertence, following those first impulses, is a dual being, God and demon, since even demons, that is, wise intelligences (as the Platonists say) are touched by certain affections. And these are they, of whom Chrysostom says: "And if they are saints, nevertheless they are men: and if they cannot be overcome by evil, nevertheless they can be struck." But if man feels nothing of the first impulses, while he is thus, he is God alone. God, I say, from the number of those who follow the first, namely, the sons of God, of whom John says: "He gave them power to become sons of God." But Plotinus, progressing further, elevates men even to exemplary virtues, which he says are twofold. Some, indeed, are in the intellect: others, however, are in the soul. In the intellect, however, (the same author says) they are not properly virtues, but exemplars of virtues. In the soul, however, which is (as he teaches elsewhere) the proper form of man, they are properly virtues. For in the intellect they are, as it were, in God, and therefore they are called exemplars. For in God, and in the intellect, which is a certain divine thing infused in us, are the actions of that which is. In the soul, however, are perfecting virtues. For there, justice, temperance, and similar things are not properly virtues, but directing rules: which, while they are in the soul, are properly virtues. For there, justice is the conversion of one to oneself, namely, and nothing diverse from that in which it is. In the soul, however, it is directing itself to God. Temperance also is there the intimate conversion of the intellect to itself, as far as is fitting. But in the soul it is tempering its passions. Fortitude there is entirely constituted outside passion, prevailing in all things. In the soul, however, it is a participant in passion, by the likeness of that from which it received. Prudence there is a full contemplation, moderating all things. Here, however, it is a habit acquired from many experiences. There is charity (so that we may also discuss our theological virtues), a love and affection embracing all things, and pervading all things with their fitting degrees: In the soul it is a gift distributed, through parts, and parts. And that which is faith instructing in the soul, and a knowledge of certain things granted by divine light, from which a solid argument of non-apparent truths is made, in the intellect is the most certain knowledge of divine and all things. And those things which the soul holds by hope, the intellect (the same author says) possesses by firm apprehension. The soul also tends towards that which the intellect attains by contact. For the intellect (says Plotinus himself) has by a certain touch that which the soul desires and hopes for. And lest Plotinus seem to have dreamed here, let us hear what our John, who had ascended that degree, testifies. "What we have heard (he says) and seen, and touched concerning the word of life, this we announce to you." But he touches divine things who proves them by a certain experience, or by the higher part (which Plotinus calls intellect) adheres to God, leaning on Him and united by a certain contiguity. "We touch (says Proclus) the divine essence, and inclined towards it, we lean on the supreme head of the soul." And Paul says: "He who adheres to God becomes one spirit with Him." Which unity of spirit follows the union of the intellect itself.

--- Page 838 ---
TONE TWO. 349
On the harmony of the soul through the understanding of things. Second Tone.

What the soul is. Chapter I.
Whether the Creator made all souls equal. Chapter II.
Why the most just Judge used this inequality in the primal distribution. Chapter III.
Whether from the fact that he distributed mortals in unequal degrees from the beginning, and pursues them with various gifts and rewards, the Creator is to be considered a respecter of persons. Chapter IIII.
Solution of some difficulties. Chapter V.
How the soul is, or appears, naked from the beginning. Chapter VI.
To what degree of understanding the soul can attain. Chapter VII.
Whether the intellect always reaches that to which it could reach. Chapter VIII.
By what means we can attain the degree of knowledge prepared for us. Chapter IX.
Whether we must proceed through external senses to reach the ultimate goal. Chapter X.
That the interior senses are true and necessary, by which more, and more certainly, can be per-

--- Page 839 ---
CANTICI TERTII
QVID SIT ANIMA. Caput primum.

[Decorative initial P in a square frame depicting a landscape with figures]

After we have investigated the soul's harmony with the body, of which it is the form, and with the virtues, of which it is the subject, we must see what agreement it has with all things that it understands. For this purpose, I judge it opportune to see what the soul is, which has such a proportion with so many things that it can understand all of them. And omitting many opinions about it that we brought forward in the first volume, we will see what it is, as far as this faculty of understanding is concerned.

Aristote. Where indeed that very common definition given by Aristotle by no means satisfies me, that the soul is the actuality of a physical, organic body having life potentially. Because this only explains that the soul is the mover of the body itself, nor from it do we have how it can understand all things. Nor is another definition sufficient, which he himself handed down, saying, The soul is the principle of sensing, understanding, and moving according to place. Because from this we only have that it is the principle of understanding, but not how it understands all things.

Idem. Nor is it surprising if it failed, since knowledge about the soul (by his own testimony) is among the most difficult things. Which we do not doubt was drawn from Plato: who says in the tenth book of the Laws: "What kind of soul it is, and what power it has, almost everyone seems to have been ignorant of." Nevertheless, here, he handed down that doctrine about the soul itself, from which we can more easily investigate its symbol and proportion with all things. But because he himself did not wish to speak in plain language about the business of the soul, which he considered most difficult and almost hidden from everyone: hence his disciples defined it in various ways, as we brought forward in the same place.

Proculus And although Proclus rejects many who have tried to explain Plato's mind concerning the soul, neither did he himself wish to reveal what Plato thought. But (unless I am mistaken) he left it to readers to infer from many things, as the more recondite Theologians are accustomed to do in any arduous matters:

Theolo. whose footsteps and doctrine, no doubt, Plato followed.

Plato From him, therefore, we can hunt for this about the soul: that it is a certain divine substance, emanating from divine sources, bringing with it number, not indeed that divine number by which the Creator arranged all things, but a rational number: by which, having proportion with all things, it can understand all things.

Pythag. Nor should it disturb anyone that we have said the soul is something divine and emanates from divine sources: since Pythagoras, the father of philosophers, also asserted this, saying in golden words: "Be confident, for a divine race is inherent in humans."

Paulus. And what is more, Paul in the Acts of the Apostles adduces and approves the saying of Aratus, in which he says: "For we are indeed his offspring." Therefore, since we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the divine is like gold, or silver, or stone, the sculpture of art, and human industry. Behold how clearly he concedes that the human race is divine. And this is in part from that higher portion, which the Platonists always venerate as divine. Nu-

--- Page 840 ---
TOMVS SECVNDVS. 350

But that very number, by which the soul exists, Aristoxenus and Xenocrates said to be self-moving. [Aristox: Xenocr.] And this, because the soul itself is the principle of the body's motion (as Aristotle proves) and also of its own motion; although here, he [Aristotle] seems to attack both this opinion and equally all who say the soul is a number. And I believe Aristotle [Aristote.] did this rather to take up a subject for discussion than to destroy the truth. This is especially true, since they speak of a rational and formal number, but he speaks of a material and vocal number of merchants. And they speak of motion that belongs to the soul, but he speaks of the motion of the body, acquiring place through the succession of part and part. Hence, Aristotle's entire argument is equivocal in both respects. For from the doctrine of Augustine, which all theologians [August. Theolo.] revere, the soul, free will, or the will, which is the power of the soul itself, moves itself to whatever it wills. Nothing is (he says) so much in the power of the will as the will itself. Which [the will], also according to their common opinion, can command the intellect to understand, and itself, to will or not to will, carrying itself into whatever it chooses. Which motion, although it is not divisible according to parts (as Aristotle presupposes), is nevertheless a true change and motion, of which those speak who say it moves itself. And this motion is also of angels and intelligences, concerning whom Job [Iob.] says: "Behold, those who serve him are not stable, or are not faithful; and in his angels he placed change" (as the literal truth has it, for which we erroneously have "he found perversity"). The soul also moves while it moves the body, which if it did not do, Aristotle [Aristote.] could not, as a physicist, treat of it by that which he presupposes in physics, saying: "Whatever moves while moving, is placed under physical consideration; but whatever does not move while moving, does not pertain to physical speculation." But since he himself, as a physicist, treats of the soul moving the body, therefore, from his doctrine, the soul is moved by moving. Which motion, even if it is called accidental, is nevertheless a true motion, since it has the principle of motion in itself and is not moved by another. Nor do the reasons restrict, by which he strives to prove that the soul is neither a number nor a harmony, since they are founded in material numbers, without doubt, and sensible ones; and the soul is from formal numbers and harmony, extracted from the senses, from which Aristotle [Idem], unwilling to learn, does not want to admit it into his sensible doctrine. Nor is there (he says) in the soul a harmonic ratio of things composed together, because the soul itself does not have parts from which it might be composed. We grant this: But we say that there is a superior and rational harmony, having the species of things within itself, by which it understands them, and the numbers of things, by which it numbers them. Which numbers and species, indeed, are not merely adventitious and newly acquired, but are connatural to the soul itself, existing in it with a certain better quality than in themselves; just as all agree concerning exemplars or ideas: that they have a more perfect being in God producing and understanding, than in their proper genus; as John [Ioan.] says: "That which was made, in him was life." Life, indeed, creative and divine.

--- Page 841 ---
1
THIRD CANTICLE

[Marginal note: Augustine.] Augustine. because nothing can exist in God unless it is divine. And Augustine judges the same concerning the exemplars of artificial things existing in the mind of the artisan, namely, that they have a more perfect existence there than the forms of artificial things: because here those forms are accidents, and a certain artifice, but there they live, and participate in the nature of the intel-
[Marginal note: Theologians.] ligent soul. Because the object, as known (some Theologians say), has that being which cognition itself has. It also has that being which the cognitive virtue or power itself has:
[Marginal note: Academics.] if the species are co-produced with it, as the Academics assert: because they do not see how the soul can measure the things it understands, unless it has within itself measures by which it can measure them. Nor do I see how the intellect can perceive that it understands truth: unless it has something within itself to which what it understands conforms. Nor is that intellective virtue sufficient: but a certain particular is required, to which what it perceives is equal. These, however, are species existing there
[Marginal note: Plato. Ancients. Aristotle.] in act, but impeded, as pleased Plato and the ancients. To which Aristotle also assents, when he says: The soul is in a certain way all things. Nor do I understand it otherwise, except that it con-
[Marginal note: Pythagoras. Plato.] tains all things in the mode of understanding, or has a proportion with all things: And that is the rational harmony, of which we speak together with the Pythagoreans and Platonists. The soul, however, falls far short of the first and supreme intellect, which understands all things simultaneously. For this (the soul), even if it equally contains, by a certain virtue, or in act, or in potency (as
[Marginal note: Peripatetics.] the Peripatetics say), the forms and images of all things to be understood, and of things to be made by it through art, it does not, however, simultaneously understand all things in act, and by a single intellection, like the first intellect: but by many and successive
[Marginal note: The same.] acts. The soul is therefore a certain intellective thing, containing all things in a certain harmony: so that it can understand all things to be understood by it.

Whether the Creator created all souls equal. Chapter II.

**T**he Peripatetics said that all souls were produced with equal degrees, and are produced: led by the opinion of their teacher, who says in his superior philosophy: Species behave like numbers, in which if one is varied, the species changes. For if one is added to three,
[Marginal note: Theologians.] it becomes four, and so on for others. Newer Parisian Theologians, however, decreed in their articles that souls differ not only by accidents, but by certain intrinsic degrees, rooted in their essence, by which each thing is this, differing from another by that which is proper to it, decreeing this, that
[Marginal note: John Scotus.] whoever says that the soul of Peter is not a perfection in its own intrinsic degree as the soul of Judas, is in error. Which they not foolishly derive from their John Scotus. Who, in the second volume of theological questions, says that each thing
[Marginal note: Wisdom.] is distinguished, first by its own nature, which is this, before it is distinguished by the principle of operation, or by its work, or by any supervening accident. To which that saying of wisdom strongly assents: I was a clever child, and I received a good soul, better indeed than many others. So great indeed is the distance

--- Page 842 ---
**TONE TWO. 351**

...of one soul from another, in wisdom, goodness, strength, powers, and disposition to diverse things, so that I do not see how they could have obtained an equal grade. Nor let anyone say that they differ in gifts, because the supreme Truth stands in the way, saying:
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
To one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one, to each according to his own virtue. Since therefore talents are gifts received by each according to his own virtue, what (I ask) is that proper virtue of each? Indeed, it is not a gratuitous gift, because that is distributed to each according to his own virtue. This virtue, therefore, is a certain natural power, determined by a certain grade, according to which it is capable of its own task and receives it. Nor let anyone object, saying that according to the Apostle's teaching, God distributes gifts to individuals as He wills.
[Marginal note: Paul.]
Is not (I ask) justice observed in the distribution of gifts, so that the gifts correspond to the virtue of each? Otherwise, neither order, nor beauty, nor propriety would be preserved by Him who is supreme justice, beauty itself, and the very harmony of all things. Observe, I pray, the words of the Apostle.
[Marginal note: The same.]
He gave (he says) some to be Apostles, others prophets, others evangelists, and teachers for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. For if he gave some to be Apostles, does he not distinguish the gift of apostleship from the intrinsic disposition by which he gave them to be suitably assumed to the apostolate? Which, unless he had given, they would have been less suitably assumed to that very grade. How excellently Gregory speaks on this matter.
[Marginal note: Gregory.]
Angels (he says) and likewise men agree in their tasks, just as in gifts, or grades bestowed by nature. Origen agrees, saying:
[Marginal note: Origen.]
There are certain invisible powers, to whom those things which are to be administered on earth have been entrusted: in whom no small difference is to be believed, just as it is found in men. And just as the members of the human body differ by a great distance, although all live by a single life, no less do the members of the mystical body differ than the eye, and the shin, or the knee in the human body. Nor does the foundation and similitude concerning numbers stand in the way, since the infallible Gospel and infallible truth do not lie. But lest we seem to despise so great a man, we will say that even in musical or formal unity there are certain hidden grades, so that it can be divided into unequal parts. Let us offer an example in musical unity as being more manifest. Indeed, a tone is in the sesquioctave ratio, such as 9 to 8, where 9 exceeds 8 by a unit, which makes the tone itself. A tone, however, is divided into semitones, lemmata, and dieses, that is, into half a tone, and a quarter part, and into more if necessary. For its division, it is necessary that the unity be divided, not indeed that material one, but the musical one. For let 18 be placed in the place of nine, and 16 in the place of eight, and from 18 to 16 is the same sesquioctave ratio: in which there are now two numbers, and two distances making two semitones. For there is a distance from 18 to 17, and from there to 16. And again, the semitone is divided into four parts of a tone, which are called dieses: And this by taking larger numbers, namely 36 in place of nine, and 32 in place of eight: And from 32 to 36 are four numbers making four dieses. And thus multiplying-

--- Page 843 ---
OF THE THIRD CANTICLE

I provide numbers, that musical unit can be divided, down to the indivisible. The same prin-
ciple is in the natural number, which is the natural proportion of things: where the unit
can be divided in the same order. Let therefore the unit be the specific ratio of a tone, and of a semitone, and
of a lemma or a diesis, the individual ratio and degree. Which ratios converge
in kind, just as those parts of a tone converge in unity. Which individual degrees
[Marginal note: Jerome.] Jerome calls forces, saying concerning that passage about the five talents given to each
according to his own ability: Not out of generosity and parsimony did he give more
to one and less to another: but according to the abilities of the recipients.

Why in the primal distribution, the most just judge used this inequality. Chapter III.

[Large decorative initial E] ND because (as I know) there are not lacking Marcionites, Valentinians, Basilidians,
and those similar to them, who inquire why with such great inequality were distributed
souls, so that one reaches the highest peak of wisdom, another
truly differs little from beasts, another is full of virtues, another either
has none, or very little, another is raised to kingship and empire,
and so much is handed over to him, that he is drunk and overflowing: from another even the little
that he has is taken away, and given to him who has. Another is led to the Apostolate and the highest peak,
and another feeds beasts, having become half-beast. Who would consider these things without
admiration? Who would not desire to understand this distribution of God, by what balance it was weighed?
But to ask this is nothing other than to inquire why the Creator Himself did not make all animals angels: or all planets the
sun: or all members, eyes. For if all limbs were eyes: where would be the hands,
where the feet, where the mouth, stomach, and other members necessary for the body? And if all
planets were the sun, where would be the Moon, overseeing the birth of the stars, so that it might bring forth offspring for us?
where Mars strengthening, Jupiter balancing, Mercury sharpening, Saturn consolidating,
and Venus connecting with love? And if all animals were angels, where would be man
the peculiar image of God? where the horses carrying him? where the oxen, ministers of human sustenance?
where other animals, which were produced for the adornment of the world and the service of man?
For just as there is no consonance, if every string of an instrument were the nete,
or paranete, or mese, or any uniform thing of this kind, since from equal
and unequal strings, or voices, consonance is generated (for harmony
and the beauty of the universe results from things equal and unequal in degrees)
no less is the beauty of the entire human race in the variety of individuals,
[Marginal note: Origen.] which most diverse things the highest Moderator (as Origen says) has drawn into the consonance of one
mystical body under Christ the head. Which consonance, both of
the world and of this mystical body, although known to very few, is nevertheless of such great
elegance and sweetness that no more perfect one can be found.
Hence the saying of Chrysippus is appropriate: Let someone teach better things

--- Page 844 ---
VOLUME TWO. 352

could have been made. No one, certainly, will teach it. And if anyone wished to correct something, they would either make it worse, or desire that which could not be made, or which is not fitting. Therefore, all parts of the world are so constituted that they could not be made better for use, nor more beautiful in appearance. So also individuals are distributed within the breadth of their species with a certain unequal equality and harmonious variety, especially human ones: each of which, and all together, bear the image of the mundane body. To these, therefore, differing by nature, various gifts have been assigned, to each according to their own virtue and disposition: To whom also rewards are given according to their works, yet by a geometric proportion, which is not concerned with number, but with the proportion of proportions: so that the proportion of gifts to gifts, and merits to merits, is the same as the proportion of rewards to rewards. And by this proportion not only does God give rewards to all, but also the civil Republic is governed: as Plato, Iamblichus, and Proclus write. [Marginal note: Plato Iambli. Procul.] Moreover, they add that for a Republic to be well governed, an arithmetic proportion is also necessary: by which, as by a certain justice moderating things, peace may be preserved. Nor is the Musical proportion lacking, which is a justice assigning a greater ratio to the greater, and a lesser to the lesser, as Proclus says. [Marginal note: Idem.] And this [musical proportion] is founded on both, taking from arithmetic, whence it equates number to number: from geometric, whence it compares proportion to proportion. From all these proportions (as we said in the first volume) this harmonious machine of the world is constructed. Therefore, it is ruled and ordered by the same, not only by those who hold the image of the supreme ruler, but by the supreme Moderator Himself: Who fashioned the human race with the same proportions: which holds the likeness of God Himself, and of this great machine. Just as therefore in this whole immense work there are unequal and equal degrees of things, from which all those proportions result, so in the human Republic there are equal and unequal degrees and ratios of individuals, from which, and likewise from their gifts and operations, all those proportions result: so that both the mundane and human republic may be harmonious and conformable.

Whether from the fact that He distributed mortals from the beginning in unequal degrees, and pursues them with various gifts and rewards, the Creator is to be considered a respecter of persons. Chapter IIII.

And since from that which appears to be an unequal distribution, people (especially superficial scholars) are accustomed to doubt whether the distributor is therefore to be considered a respecter of persons, giving greater gifts to one than to another. From this point, we have decided to address all doubts, first with the opinions of the Fathers, and then with reasons. For Paul, the herald of truth, with the Romans, Ephesians, and Co- [Marginal note: Paulus]

--- Page 845 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

[Marginal note: Peter.
Acts.]
acting in Joppa reiterates: God is not an acceptor of persons. Peter asserts this same thing, writing to his Pontians, Galatians, Cappadocians & Bithynians. And again in the Apostolic Acts he gives thanks to God, when he most certainly proved that there is no acceptance of persons with Him. For an acceptor of persons (as [Marginal note: Theologians] our Theologians teach) is one who, for some reason, owes to others, and when merits and offenses are equal, does not render equal rewards, or equal punishments. For a judge appointed to administer justice, having found two equally guilty of homicide, if he orders one of them to pay the penalty for his guilt, but absolves the other either entirely, or somewhat, from the due punishment, he is rightly called, and is, an acceptor of persons. No differently if he has two equally well-deserving of the Republic, and renders rewards to one according to his works, but to the other, by no means. But if someone, by his generosity, gives to someone what he does not wish to give to another, he does not thereby accept a person, because to no one...

--- Page 846 ---
VOLUME TWO. 353

Take what is yours, and go. I want to give to this last one as I also gave to you. Is it not lawful for me to do what I wish, since I am a free owner? Or is your eye evil because I am good? Which things may have been said either concerning the Jewish people and the Gentiles, of whom the former had come early in the morning to the Lord's vineyard, but the latter in the evening. Hence, a dispute between them, just as Paul (as Jerome testifies in the prologue) runs through the entire Epistle to the Romans. [Marginal note: Paul. Jerome.] Whether it is understood concerning particular individuals, we have this one thing: that the promised reward is at the will of the promiser, without any injustice, since no obligation intervenes. But where some reason or covenant intervenes, God always deals with us with an equal portion. For there is in Him a certain obligation, either of nature dictating, that having care for all children, He procures salvation and the kingdom for them, in whom also seeing His own image He loves them greatly, as His own work, and causes it to rain upon them, both good and bad, and makes His sun rise. Or there is an obligation voluntarily introduced from a covenant made concerning giving eternal life and kingdom to those who keep His precepts. Which He enjoined, so that He [Marginal note: The Same.] (according to Jerome's opinion) might have a reason for rewarding: or that He might cleanse and perfect man by these precepts and sacrifices. Hence, not content even with these, in order to perfect His children still more, He gave counsels of perfection, with an express covenant of reward, saying: "Everyone who has left house, [Marginal note: CHRIST.] brothers, or sisters, or father or mother, or children, or lands for my name's sake, will receive a hundredfold, and will possess eternal life." And because He is the Father of all, He calls all as sons to the kingdom. Hence, when Peter [Marginal note: Peter.] saw that He had care for saving Cornelius the Gentile just as for the Jews, he said: "Now I have truly understood that God shows no partiality." But if a covenant had been made concerning rewarding each one according to their works, if He were to fall short in anything, He could be accused of partiality. But if He bestows something beyond what was promised out of His liberality, He incurs no mark of partiality.

Solution of some difficulties. Chapter V.

[Decorative initial N in a square frame with foliage]
Now indeed, before we proceed, some things which seem to greatly trouble us, and which are principal, must be explained to the best of our ability. Why, concerning two brothers born of the same parents, when they had done neither good nor evil, was it said through Malachi: [Marginal note: Malachi.] "Jacob I have loved, but Esau I have hated." Nor does that trouble us less which scripture says concerning Pharaoh: "For this very purpose I have raised you up, that I might show my power in you, and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth." [Marginal note: Exodus.] Which Paul, recalling, adds: "Therefore, He has mercy on whom He wills, and whom He wills He hardens." [Marginal note: Paul.]
YY

--- Page 847 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

...whom He wills, He hardens. Indeed a harsh saying, and very different from that which God Himself uttered. For He says in Exodus, "I will have mercy on whom I will, and I will be merciful to whom I please."
[Marginal note: Paul]
Or (as it is found in the truth of the letter), "I will show favor to whom I grant grace, and I will have mercy on whom I am merciful." But when Paul spoke of Pharaoh, whose heart is said to have been hardened by the Lord, he said: "Whom He wills, He hardens." If therefore God hardens, who will be able to be softened? And if God hates, who will find grace? And if God rejects someone, who will make him chosen? How then does He wish all to be saved, and love all things which He made, hating nothing, if He hates and rejects some before they do anything good or evil? But far be contradiction from God, whose words are the rules of eternal truth. And although
[Marginal note: The same.]
Paul rebukes those who presume to investigate these things: "Who are you, O man," (he says) "who would answer God? Can the thing formed say to him who formed it, 'Why have you made me thus?' Or does not the potter have power over the clay, from the same lump to make one vessel for honor and another for dishonor?" Nevertheless, for the resolution of this difficulty, we will briefly discuss something, so that we may satisfy the readers somewhat, not only concerning some, but concerning all whom He seems to harden.
[Marginal note: The same.]
For God (says Paul himself) has concluded all in unbelief, that He may have mercy on all. For the Gentiles were unbelievers, the Idumaeans hated, the Egyptians hardened, many made vessels of dishonor, indeed all born children of wrath. These things so distress the apostle that he is compelled to exclaim: "O the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How incomprehensible are His judgments, and unsearchable are His ways! Who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been His counselor?" What then shall we so insignificant ones say to these things, when the vessel of election is silent, and as if despairing of a resolution, says that the judgments of God are incomprehensible to us?
[Marginal note: Origen]
Indeed (as Origen says), to seek a special and individual reason for each is the mark of the unskillful, and to wish to give one is the mark of a madman. However, to assign some reason (at least in general), and as far as the Lord has granted, to solve these knots which seem inexplicable, hard, and contradictory, we do not judge rash.
[Marginal note: Wisdom]
And that we may do this better, this indeed must be stated beforehand: that God loves all, and wishes all to be saved. "Good is (says the Wise Man) and sweet, O Lord, is Your spirit in all things, and You love all things that are, and hate nothing
[Marginal note: Paul, Augustine]
of those which You have made." And He loved so much that Paul himself says: "His own Son He did not spare, but delivered Him up for us all." Nor is (says Augustine) God a punisher before man has been a sinner. Therefore, He does not reject anyone before he himself, by wicked works, provokes God's judgment against himself. Therefore, He did not hate Esau unto his damnation, utterly rejecting him: but subjected him to his brother's dominion for a time, as the apostle excellently says:
[Marginal note: Paul]
"That according to election, the purpose of God might remain, not from works, but from calling, it was said to him: 'The elder shall serve the younger.'" For neither was the discourse concerning a particular person, since Esau never served Jacob, I know.

--- Page 848 ---
**VOLUME TWO. 354**

that he took away his birthright, but it was said of the people; as the Lord himself explained, saying to Rebecca: "Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples shall be separated from your body; and one people shall be stronger than the other people, and the elder shall serve the younger." Nor did he serve perpetually, but for a time: as is clear, Isaac, taught by the Holy Spirit, had promised him, saying: "By your sword you shall live, and you shall serve your brother: and the time will come when you shall shake off and loose his yoke from your neck." For he, who was also called Edom, served the kings of Israel, as David says, repeating twice: "Over Edom I will cast my shoe, that is, subjecting it to me," [Marginal note: David.] as Jerome explains. "To me the foreigners, that is, the Allophyli, or Philistines, are subject." [Marginal note: Hiero.] But the yoke was shaken off when the Messiah came, who freed all from servitude, calling them to faith: as Paul adds. "He called not only from among the Jews, but also from among the Gentiles, [Marginal note: Paul. Hosea.] as it is said in Hosea: 'I will call those who were not my people, "my people," and her who was not beloved, "beloved," and her who had not obtained mercy, "obtained mercy."'" For a living stone has been laid in Zion: "Everyone who believes in him will not be put to shame, nor will he be a slave, but free:" by which liberty Christ himself freed us. He also willed to harden the heart of Pharaoh and the Egyptians: so that he might show his power in them: but when the Messiah came, he so softened those Egyptians that all their deserts were filled with monks serving Christ himself. Or let us say, that he hardens no otherwise than as clay is hardened by its own disposition by that sun which melts wax. For the same God [Marginal note: August.] (as Augustine argues in a long series) diffused the rays of his justice upon two kings and peoples, the Chaldean and the Egyptian. But the heart of the Babylonian was softened by the same sun, while that of the Egyptian was hardened. God daily softens the heart of him who hears his voice: but hardens and dries up that of him who disobeys, as the apostle himself testifies elsewhere. "But according to your hardness and impenitent heart, [Marginal note: Paul.] you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God." If anyone, therefore, is hardened, it does not happen without his own fault, for God sends his rays into us, so that by warming he may soften, but if anyone, being hardened, resists, he is hardened still more. He wills therefore to warm, but if hardness follows, it happens because the one receiving that warmth abuses it, just as some have abused the benefit of redemption, and it turned into ruin for them: which for others, well-disposed, was and is for the benefit of resurrection. For thus it happens to the sick who refuse to take medicine, or who take it without proper regimen: that the illness is aggravated, not indeed by the fault of the physician, but by the fault of the sick person himself: thus it happens to those who abuse God's benefit. But still we are pressed when considering with what pious and paternal care it has come to pass that some are born among the Hebrews, among whom was the learning of the divine law, or are born among Christians instructed in evangelical doctrine. Others, however, among the Ethiopians, or the Canary Islands: where eating human flesh is customary: or among the Scythians, for whom patricide,
YY ij

--- Page 849 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

as if by a certain piety it was being committed, or among the Taurians, where guests were sacrificed: or among the Indians, where the devil is still worshipped as a certain deity. This was not brought about against ancestral piety: since the same (says [Marginal note: Paul] Paul) is Lord of all, and rich towards all who invoke him. For everyone, whoever shall invoke the name of the Lord, shall be saved. And for the one disputing, the apostle further states: And how will they invoke him in whom they have not believed? And how will they believe him whom they have not heard? To which he replies: Have they not heard? And indeed their sound has gone out into all the earth, and their words to the ends of the earth, namely, of those preaching the name of the Lord: who is content to have various worshippers, and diverse in customs, for the beauty of the universe. But if they refused to persevere in the worship handed down by the apostles, let the fault be theirs, and not God's, who called them. But what shall we say about the Gentiles before Christ, or about the inhabitants of the eastern islands recently discovered: to whom the name of the Lord does not seem to have reached?

--- Page 850 ---
TONVS SECVNDVS.
                                                                355

with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven: but the sons of the kingdom
will be cast out into outer darkness. For many who are devoid of the kingdom of heaven are
judged by those who judge only according to what is external:
yet they are most pleasing friends to God. The Centurion was considered an outsider, never- [Marginal note: Centurion]
theless he is commended for his faith above all Israelites. For into such men,
even if they do not have a sensible sign, the power of Christ can nevertheless pass,
as Paul often repeats. "If by the transgression of one," he says, "many died, much [Marginal note: Paul]
more did the grace of God, and the gift in the grace of one man, Jesus Christ, abound to
many." And again. "For if by the transgression of one, death reigned, through one
much more shall those who receive the abundance of grace, and of the gift, and of righteousness,
reign in life through one Jesus Christ." And again. "Therefore, just as through the transgression of one
it resulted in condemnation for all men, so also through the righteousness of one
it resulted in justification of life for all men. For if by the disobedience of one man
many were constituted sinners, so also by the obedience of one many are constituted righteous."
He repeats this often, to make us attentive that the justifying and cleansing
power of Christ is not less than was the defiling sin of Adam.
For in Christ and through Christ, who is the true cleansing water (of which
this elemental [water] is a sign), we are regenerated and cleansed. And although the sign
is never without the signified (provided the recipient does not obstruct), the thing of the
sacrament which is signified can well exist without the sign. There is (say the Theologians) a triple [Marginal note: Theologians]
baptism: of water, of the spirit, and of blood. The baptism of the spirit suffices (as they say)
without the baptism of water, but not this without that. But God is able
from these stones, who indeed seemed reprobate, to raise up children to Abraham.
And God is able (says Paul) to graft in those who were cut off because of unbelief, [Marginal note: Paul]
unless they remain in that unbelief itself. And through grafting, both a wild olive shoot
and a good olive tree become fruitful. For both are grafted in here, bearing fruit.
The divine word is also grafted in us (as James says): [Marginal note: James]
and we are grafted into it when we adhere to it through faith: and in it we lay
the foundation of our works: and then vessels which were formed for dishonor
are made vessels of honor, and worthy of the royal table. Nor were only some
vessels for dishonor (as the apostle touches upon somewhere), but all, as he [Marginal note: Paul]
himself says elsewhere. We are all born children of wrath, subject namely to sin, and vessels
of dishonor: although some are ordained for honor. And what? Let Paul himself speak,
discussing with Timothy. "If anyone," he says, "cleanses himself, he will become a vessel from dishonor
into honor, sanctified, and useful for every work for the master, prepared
for every good work." Behold, what he previously attributed to divine election, he now
attributes to our works and disposition. This, however, is beyond all controversy:
For God's election intervenes, and grace preceding, cooperating, and justifying.
Our consent is also present, and our cooperating will.
For we are co-workers of God, but for harmonizing the soul, about which it was
                                                                YY iij

--- Page 851 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

Let us return to the discourse.
        How the soul is bare in its origin, or appears so. Chapter VI.
[Large decorative initial E] **A**nd if souls have been distinguished by the Creator by diverse degrees, yet there is one common origin for all of them, and the same birth.
**GOD.** All souls (says the heavenly Father and giver of all forms) are mine, and indeed begotten by me, and diffused into bodies.
**Wise Man.** As for birth, however, I am indeed (says the wise man) a mortal man, similar to all, conceived from the seed of man, and the fitting delight of the flesh. And being born, I received the common air, and fell upon the similarly made earth, and emitted my first cry, similar to all, weeping. Nor did anyone, even among kings, have a different beginning of birth. Therefore, there is one entrance for all to life, and a similar exit, without, that is, any knowledge or virtue. Hence among
**Peripatetics.** the Peripatetics is that now trivial saying to all, that the soul from the beginning is like a blank slate (tabula rasa), on which nothing is depicted. To which that wise man, whoever he may be, seems to assent by what he adds: "Because of this (because, namely, naked and ignorant I came forth from my mother's womb) I desired, and understanding was given to me: I in-
**Plato.** voked, and the spirit of wisdom came into me." But Plato, whom many from his academy follow, when he had seen many learn without difficulty, indeed often know things they had not learned, was of the opinion that the species and forms of things, and consequently doctrines, were co-created with the soul, but hindered by the senses and bodily bonds, so much so that by study, time, and exercise, the inherent species are brought out.
**Ancients.** Hence some ancients said that the soul entering the body drinks from the Lethaean whirlpool, called ἀπὸ τῆς λήθης, that is, from oblivion. Although others say this is a river of the underworld, from which those descending drink, because they forget all the pleasures by which they were delighted in the world. Whence
**Seneca.** Seneca: "Within, in a vast bosom, Lethe glides quietly with a calm current: And it removes cares, lest the power of returning be open any longer. With many windings it enfolds the heavy river." And truly, in both cases, the soul suffers a great lethargy, when it is immersed in the body and bound; and when, deprived of divine light, it is delivered to the dark shadows of the abyss. Nor was this opinion first published by
**Plato.** Plato, but accepted from ancient
**Theologians.** Theologians, who believe all souls, produced by their progenitor, to be perfect in all their forms,
**Ancients.** just as the soul of the first parents had been produced. Which he himself obscured by transgression, from the contagion of whose sin, our souls also, entering the body, are obscured and completely lulled to sleep. And just as it was said to the first parent concerning bodily food, and perhaps concerning both: "By the sweat of your face, or of your nostrils, that is, of your spirit, you shall eat your bread." so that voice, and harsh sentence, seems to thunder for all of us: "By your sweat and toil you shall eat the bread, both of your body and of your soul, which is doctrine and knowledge of things." For we must grow cold, and sweat, and suffer many things,

--- Page 852 ---
VOLUME TWO.
356

if we wish either to learn anew (as the Peripatetics say) or to draw out that doctrine which the most generous distributor infused into our discerning souls from the beginning: but soon obscured by a foul veil through the fault of our first parents. Which God, by His kindness, deigned to remove from the eyes of some. For David did not learn letters, and from a shepherd he became a prophet, and [Marginal note: David.] a preeminent teacher of divine things. With these he so filled his hymns, that all poets, however exquisite, yield to him by a long interval. Thus Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the other prophets, and also the apostles, to whom He [Marginal note: Isaiah. Ezekiel Daniel. CHRIST.] said: I will give you a mouth and wisdom. God also filled Solomon in the dream of a single night with such wisdom for managing affairs and lower things, that not even one of all the ancient Kings was similar to him (even by a long interval). In the wisdom of divine things, however, without doubt his father David excelled more, by the anointing made by God's command through Samuel. Hence, when he was anointed (as it is found in the first book of Kings) the spirit of the Lord was immediately directed upon him. For the Spirit indeed suggests and teaches all things, whether by its own chrism, or anointing, and the power of the sacred name, concerning which it is said in the Canticles, [Marginal note: Canticles. John.] Your name is as oil poured forth. To those who have this anointing, John says, You have an anointing from the Holy One, and you know all things. The chrism and power of this name, when Christ had delivered it to those whom He knew to be suitable and chosen by the [Marginal note: CHRIST: John. Jeremiah,] Father, He said: Father, I have manifested Your name to the men whom You gave Me. Some were even anticipated by this chrism in their mother's womb: as we read of John and Jeremiah. Whether this was by the infusion of new wisdom, or by the removal of the veil, so that the intellect, unhindered and with unveiled face, could transcend from clarity to clarity, God knows: For I yield to the truth, and to the sacred scriptures established in truth itself. From which we have that God had made all things very good, namely, in their complete perfection. For just as He filled vegetative trees with fruits, the use of which He granted to the first parents: so I believe He made rational trees fruitful with forms and cognitions: but from the transgression of the first parent, the fruits of both were diminished: and their cultivation was imposed, with labor and sweat of the spirit, and the exercise of all faculties.

To what degree of understanding the soul can attain. Chapter VII.

[Decorative initial Q] Very many intelligible things exist, all of which indeed only the divine intellect perceives, but others, as much as is granted to them. Nor is it fitting that all should be equal to the first, because nothing would distinguish between God and creature, if the thought of others could attain all that God knows. There are also many things which angels (especially the higher ones) understand (whence they are called intelligences, or intelligent ones) which we

YY iiij

--- Page 853 ---
To what degree of understanding the soul can attain. Chapter VII.

[Q] uite many intelligible things exist, all of which indeed only the divine intellect alone perceives, but others [perceive] as much as is granted to them. Nor is it fitting that all should be equal to the first, because nothing would distinguish between God and creature, if the thought of others could attain all things that God knows. There are also many things which angels (especially the higher ones) understand (whence they are called intelligences, or intelligent ones) which we

YY iiij...

--- Page 854 ---
TONE TWO. 357

this, or that particular [intellect], which some of them denied, especially Averroes, [Marginal note: Aver. Ancients]
judging that universal intellect, together with this or that particular animal, to be sufficient for constituting man. In this, corrupting the opinion of the ancients, who spoke of that unique and universal intellect. And he fixed, and fixes, that error which subverts the natural and true philosophy of the ancients: destroys moral philosophy and Theology: takes away justice and every virtue: and is so far removed from all reason that it is worthy neither of reckoning nor of remembrance: but is to be consigned to perpetual silence by complete oblivion. [Marginal note: Theol.] We could also say that the intellect, even if it apprehends all things, does not however comprehend them (as some Theologians say) or does not fully apprehend them. For concerning God, all apprehend that He is: but what He is, no one [knows]. Even the simplest confess the Father, but who He is, no one knows, except the Son, and to whom the Son wishes to reveal [Him]. Concerning the Son also, many speak much, yet no one knows Him [Himself]. Therefore, concerning these things, and concerning the secrets and mysteries, which are concerning the most holy Trinity itself, and God Himself, [Marginal note: Eccl.] we can say that [which is] from Ecclesiasticus: "Glorify Him as much as you can, He will still surpass [it], and His magnificence is admirable: Exalt Him as much as you can, for He is greater than all praise. Exalting Him, you will be filled with virtue: And do not labor, for you will not comprehend. For many things are hidden, greater than these, and few are seen from His many works." Aristotle also agrees, [Marginal note: Aristo.] while he says: "Our discourse concerning divine substance is very little and weak:" And he praises [Marginal note: Simon.] that opinion of Simonides, that God alone has this honor, to be a metaphysician, understanding namely Himself, all divine things, separate substances, quiddities, properties, number, proportion, and every kind of proportion of all things. Behold then how many things there are which our intellect [Marginal note: CHRIST.] cannot attain. Nor will [our intellect], freed from the body, perfectly understand all things, which that divine and infinite intellect comprehends. Nor does it hinder what the highest Truth said concerning the spirit which believers were to receive: "He will bring to your remembrance all things, and will teach you all things:" For this is understood, not concerning all things absolutely, but concerning those things which were to be understood by them, and especially concerning those things which He wished to manifest to the disciples while He lived, saying: "I have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now." Thus also is understood that [saying] of John: "You have an anointing [Marginal note: Idem. John.] from the Holy One, and you know all things," meaning, all things to be understood by you.

Whether the intellect always attains that to which it could attain. Chapter VIII.

[Ornamental initial N] From this arises no small difficulty: whether the intellect always attains every intelligible thing to which it could naturally proceed. Here we briefly say that (unless I am mistaken) understanding and living run with the same pace. For to each is a fixed term of life, which he cannot pass, yet to which even few arrive, by death [many...]
YY v

--- Page 855 ---
CANTICI TERTII

God acting beforehand for these reasons. [Marginal note: Sapien.] Sometimes, because violence is inflicted, or infirmity and death itself are brought on by bad governance, Or (as I speak with the wise man) because, being made perfect in a short time, he fulfilled many years: For his soul was pleasing to God, therefore He hastened to take him out of the midst of iniquity. It happens no differently to one destined for some degree of doctrine and some grace. For to proceed thither, he sometimes and more often neglects, or entangled in other cares, whether fearing labor, or obscured by his own malice, whence wisdom and the knowledge of divine and human things disdains to enter that malevolent and sluggish soul: [Marginal note: Osee. Dauid.] just as it is disdained by the soul itself, as it is said in the prophet Hosea: "But you have rejected knowledge." And in a Davidic hymn: "He would not understand, that he might do well." And often man falls short of the degree of knowledge prepared for him, because [Marginal note: Ieremi.] he despises the fount of all knowledge and light: as Jeremiah says, "They did not seek the Lord, therefore they did not understand." Because just as the sun is not seen except in the light of the sun: so God is not seen except in that light of which the Psalmist says: [Marginal note: Dauid.] "In your light we shall see light." He says, light, not only of divine things, but also of natural things. Illuminated by which, the wise perceived the natures and properties of things much more clearly than those who relied only on natural light. Hence Eusebius of Caesarea brings forth an excellent judgment concerning both lights, saying: [Marginal note: Eusebi.] "When I compare philosophers among themselves, or with others, I would not easily deny that they were illustrious men. But when I compare them with the theologians and philosophers of the Hebrews, and I compare their doctrine with the doctrine of those, all things which the philosophers devised seem to me fleeting and frivolous. Nor is it a wonder: Those were divinely published, these humanly. Those, I say, were seen (to speak with Plato) by lunar light, but these by solar light." [Marginal note: Plato.] For Plato calls that light solar which is poured forth by God: but lunar, that which is acquired by the powers of nature. [Marginal note: CHRISTVS. (written vertically)] But let us pursue the matter. Many in the Gospel are said to have been invited to the wedding, but because they disdained to come, others were substituted. Many were called to the heavenly kingdom, to whom it was also said: "The kingdom of God will be taken from you, and given to a nation producing fruit." Twelve were chosen as apostles, to whom the most recondite secrets of God were to be entrusted, yet one of them became a devil, and a horrible cave of shadows. Again, many more were called to the discipleship of Christ, to whom He was about to give grace, the kingdom, and the true doctrine of things, if they had stood firm. For to the disciples who followed Him, He daily suggested many things by His light, but some, obscured and enveloped in the darkness of their obstinacy or evil works, being unable to bear that light, "went back" (says John) and go back daily. Pitying these, the most merciful Father and Teacher says: "Hold fast what you have, lest another take your crown."

--- Page 856 ---
**SECOND TONE. 358**

By what means we may attain the degree of knowledge prepared for us. Chapter IX.

<span style="font-size: 200%; line-height: 0.5; vertical-align: -0.2em;">N</span>E lest anyone labor in vain about many things in order to reach that very degree of knowledge to which he can attain according to his own disposition, we will go to the supreme master of all wisdom and doctrine, Christ Jesus, and we will see from where he drew his doctrine. "My doctrine," he says, "is not mine, but of the Father who sent me." And making his disciples participants in this instruction, he says: "All things whatsoever I have heard from my Father, I have made known to you," that is, according to your capacity. For he reserved many things which, although they had been baptized and washed with the water of saving wisdom, yet they could neither grasp nor bear then, because not yet well cleansed and strengthened, they were offended by the superior light. Therefore he says: "But when that spirit of truth comes, whom the Father will send in my name, he, as it were, more familiar to you, by his fiery power will excite and sharpen your minds; and dwelling with you, and poured into you, will suggest all things to you, and will teach you all things whatsoever I shall have said to you." Nor let this be said only of the twelve apostles. For that spirit poured upon all who were together in the same place, whose number (as Luke had said a little earlier) was about one hundred and twenty men. This spirit had also poured upon many others, as Luke relates concerning the Samaritans. [Luke.] "When," he says, "the apostles who were in Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them." Who, when they had come, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Spirit. And then they laid hands upon them, and they received the Holy Spirit, who was given by the laying on of the apostles' hands, and sometimes by their words, as is said below. [The same.] While Peter was speaking with the Centurion, the Holy Spirit fell upon all who had heard the word of God. From which many were astonished, that the grace of the Holy Spirit was poured out even on the Gentiles. [Paul.] And when Paul had baptized certain Ephesians and had laid hands upon them, the Holy Spirit came upon them. And what this spirit worked is immediately declared, while it is said: "And they spoke with tongues and prophesied." For immediately from that sacred chrism followed the gift of knowledge and kinds of tongues, so that they could express to all what they knew. And this is the true chrism with which those were anointed in ancient times who immediately became prophets, and the first evangelical fathers were anointed, so that they might know all things and speak with tongues. Of which chrism (alas, unhappy times) we now have only the outward sign or name, so that we are called Christians and anointed. [CHRIST.] For these (says the supreme truth) "will be the signs of those who have believed in me and have been anointed with my chrism, that is. In my name they will cast out demons; they will speak with new tongues; and the other things that follow." Forgetting the power of this name and the gift of the Holy Spirit, those who are called wise in our time labor so that from a treacherous Arab,

--- Page 857 ---
CANTICI TERTII.

or from a Greek demon, let them learn those things which they ought to receive from heaven and from the Holy Spirit. Many indeed could (if they wished) follow Christ's footsteps in truth, and be bathed in His light. But very many are so darkened that they cannot grasp that light which illuminates all. What then is to be done? It must be sought, I say, the gift of God and of the Holy Spirit, who suggests all things according to our capacity:
[Marginal note: Mer.] And the mind must be sought, which having obtained (says Trismegistus), they are considered immortal instead of mortal, having embraced all things with their understanding, which are on earth, which are in the sea, and if there is anything beyond them above heaven. And they so elevate themselves that they also behold the Good itself. Which indeed when they perceive, they consider the air by which we live here a kind of misery: and having neglected all bodily things, they are carried towards the one alone. For this is the knowledge of the mind: namely, the contemplation of divine things and the understanding of God, with the divine crater existing, and indeed with understanding, and that divine (thing) communicated to us. Which when wisdom had filled, it sent a herald, certainly a good synderesis, or a good genius, commanding such things to be announced to the souls of men. Let whoever can immerse himself in this cup, believing the crater, that the soul will return to God who had sent it down, and knowing the end for which it was born: Whoever therefore hears the herald, immersing themselves in the mind, these, having become participants of knowledge and receiving the mind, become perfect men. And to the son asking in what way he will be washed by the liquid of this crater, he says. "Unless, O son, you hate your body, you will not be able to love yourself. As soon as you have loved not yourself, but God, you will immediately obtain the mind: Having finally obtained this knowledge, you will immediately acquire it. Nor believe that you can attend to both at once, mortal and divine things. For we have two things, corruptible and incorruptible; by choosing one, we lose
[Marginal note: Idem.] the other. And whenever the care for one is relaxed, the care for the other is intensified." And so that Mercurius himself might apply his mind to wisdom, having dismissed all care for lower things, he labored (as we learned from a good author) for twenty-six years before he obtained the mind, for the sake of obtaining it. Which the true disciples of Christ immediately obtained, although for obtaining it, each delivered similar precepts. Did not Christ also teach to hate the body, and this soul, namely the lower and animal one? Did He not declare with full voice that we absolutely cannot serve two masters: God and Mammon, spirit and flesh, divine and earthly things? all of which run with the same pace. Did He not teach to seek first the kingdom of God, by obtaining which all other things follow? "But I cannot (you will say) neither obtain this mind, nor be bathed in the light of Christ or the Holy Spirit, since now in this our unhappy time, the divine powers no longer seem to dwell with us, perhaps (but would that it were false) driven away by our misdeeds." They must therefore be recalled with all our might. But if that cannot be done, hear what Jerome says against Rufinus. "What the Holy Spirit suggests to the apostles, must be acquired by me through the study of literature." Of literature indeed, which writes down those things which di-

--- Page 858 ---
VOLUME TWO. 359

...which were received by divine oracles, not those devised by human intellects: because these do not enlighten, but rather darken the intellects. For whom indeed do they teach and instruct (says Firmianus) who have not yet instructed themselves? [Marginal note: Lactam.] Whom can the sick heal, or the blind guide? Therefore, let all of us who care about life apply ourselves to this. Or shall we wait until Socrates knows something? [Marginal note: Socra. Anaxa.] Or Anaxagoras sees light in the darkness? Or Democritus draws virtue out of a well? [Marginal note: Demo. Empe. Arche. Carnea.] Or Empedocles widens the path of his soul? Or Arcesilaus and Carneades see, feel, and perceive? Behold, a voice from heaven teaching, and showing us a light clearer than the sun: Why are we unjust to ourselves, and hesitate to receive wisdom, which learned men, having worn out their lives in inquiry, were never able to find? Whoever therefore wishes to be wise and blessed

--- Page 859 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

[Marginal note: Arist.] Peripatetics: who in most places have repeated from their Aristotle: *Nothing is in the intellect that was not first in the senses.* Which we grant to those who have tasted only knowledge derived from the senses, and are content with their threefold way of knowing, through definition, division, and composition. But we are convinced that there are two other ways of understanding, not touched upon by the teacher of sensible doctrine. Of which one is the vision, and clear [understanding] of divine and natural things, I will not say speculation, but contemplation and contact: The other is the equation of truth itself, [Marginal note: Moses.] expounded by others with our intellect. Moses had arrived at the first [way] concerning natural things, according to that which the Lord had promised him, saying: *You shall see my hinder parts, namely creatures: which, in respect to the Creator, are posterior, and His effects.* [Marginal note: Peripate.] H

--- Page 860 ---
TONE TWO. 360

...terior brings much fruit, by working, seeing, and tasting divine things. Which the apostle [Paulus.] explains somewhat, saying: "You are dead, and your life is hidden with Christ." Therefore, by this death the prophets and all friends of God died, when they entered into those inner sanctuaries of God. By this death also John [Iohan.] was seized, when at the beginning of the most sacred vision he said: "I was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day," by which he was carried up and saw the throne of God, and the Lamb, and the seven spirits standing by, and all things that were decreed to happen in various past times. He also heard the songs of the saints and angels, and penetrated to many most recondite mysteries. Of this death also Paul [Paulus] makes mention, saying: "I know a man—whether in the body or out of the body, I do not know, God knows—caught up in this way, even to the third heaven, and he heard secret words of God, which it is not lawful for a man to utter." For then there occurs a separation of the soul from the body, and not of the body from the soul: because the latter is vivified by the soul itself, which neither operates in the body nor lives in it, except insofar as it vivifies it. To this mode of knowing also the apostles had come: and all who were imbued with that divine light and the Spirit suggesting all things, they too departed by this precious death. A sign of this was that they feared neither death, nor suffering, nor insult inflicted upon the body, which was already dead as an animal.

But those mysteries were shown to some less, to some more, according to their capacity, even though they had been seized by the same death. The other mode of knowing is through truth made equal with our intellect: just as a key is made equal to its lock. By this, even if we do not perceive in full light those things which are set forth by those who have beheld the mysteries themselves, yet a door is opened to us, so that from the conformity of perceived truth, and from the light which illuminates us from those opened inner sanctuaries, we may be rendered more certain than from the apparent demonstrations of the philosophers. I would call them "apparent" because they made either no, or very few, true demonstrations in natural things: but they are deduced from pre-accepted notions by Aristotle, or by whoever it may be, who had predicted those things beforehand. Therefore, this mode of understanding assigned by the Philosophers [Philoso.]: we have called the lowest of all, and less certain. The highest is that which is held by that clear intuition. The middle, however, is when it is given to us, not only to read and understand with external ears, but to perceive with better senses those things which are hidden in what is handed down under veils by those who beheld the same things with true intuition. For there are many, concerning whom the highest truth says, that "hearing they hear not and understanding they understand not." For it is sometimes given to us [CHRISTVS.], that we may clearly perceive the truth emanating from the marrow of the sacred scriptures, and that, with the veil removed and face unveiled, we may behold those things which are commonly hidden from the wise of the world: and with such certainty that all perplexity is removed, when we perceive them with better senses than external ones.

•

--- Page 861 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

**That interior senses are true and necessary, by which more and more certain things can be perceived than by exterior ones. Chapter XI.**

[A large decorated initial letter D set within a square frame with floral and scrollwork patterns] Therefore, it is about these interior senses, as better ones, that we must discourse: especially since the Peripatetics, who are primarily prominent in this age, have written most fully and minutely about exterior senses, but nothing about interior ones, except that there is a certain common sense, and phantasy, or imagination, which they placed in the anterior concavity of the brain: so that, receiving sensible species, it might judge between them, and, stripped of material conditions, might present them, now purified, to the intellect: And (as Algazel says) all senses would be joined in it, and emanate, and depend on it as parts from their whole. Or (as others say) it itself would result from the parts, as a kind of integral whole. Or it is (as held by others) a virtue or power more spiritual than the particular senses: and they proceeded no further concerning these interior senses. But Plato, agreeing with Mercury and Moses, asserts in the Symposium that man is twofold, and each part with its own senses: so that he has four eyes, two pertaining to the exterior man, others to the interior man, and as many ears, and nostrils, also hands, and feet as many. Likewise two mouths, and a double taste, and finally all things doubled: Which in the first homily on the Song of Songs by Jerome, or by Origen, or by whoever (whoever he was) who edited it (for its author is uncertain) are both presupposed and discussed. Whereby through many passages of sacred scripture we are reminded that man is twofold. For thus Moses wrote in the beginning of Genesis: "male and female he created them." Yet the female was not produced then, but afterwards, many other things having been produced in that interval, therefore that writing is about the twofold man, of whom the exterior and animal part is called feminine and inferior: but the interior and better part is called masculine. Concerning these, Paul, often repeating, teaches many things about separating the interior man from the exterior man who is corrupted. Also, the entire song of the divine epithalamium is about him. For it does not sing of the eyes, nostrils, mouth, teeth, breasts, chest, belly, legs, and other members of the animal man: but of the better and archetypal man, as we have discussed more extensively elsewhere. But continuing concerning the senses, we say that they do not recognize them: nor through them any better sensible things: except those who have them (as the apostle says), "exercised to discern good and evil." This discernment is by no means made through the exterior senses. For the boundaries of touch are hot and cold, hard and soft, rough and smooth. Sight, however, extends only to color and light, and darkness. Smell distinguishes between odors and stenches. Taste distinguishes between sweet and bitter: sharp and fatty: salty and pungent: austere and pleasant: tart and sour: hearing, however, only apprehends sound. None of them, therefore, makes a distinction between good and evil, but the better senses, by which not only moral—

[Marginal notes]
Perispa.
Algazel
Plato
Mer.
Moses.
Hiero.
Orige.
Moses.
Paulus.
Idem.

--- Page 862 ---
TONE TWO. 361

-ral things, but we can perceive God himself, according to that saying of the Davidic song,
"Taste and see that the Lord is good." And again. "I will hear" [Marginal note: David.]
"what the Lord God speaks in me:" whose fragrance also perceiving, the inte- [Marginal note: Canticles]
rior man, cries out in the Canticles: "We will run in the fragrance of your ointments." [Marginal note: Peripatetics]
Perhaps the Peripatetics will hiss and say: "With all study and all
diligence, we have investigated the lot of human nature, yet we have not perceived whether these
inner senses exist, indeed, we have not even heard of them." I am not surprised, since divine
and spiritual things of this kind are such that they mock the proud and those who presume upon themselves, [Marginal note: Plato]
and are utterly hidden from them. Concerning these things, Plato in his letter to Dio-
nysius [says]: "For whoever hears these things, at first glance rejects them: But after
these things have been well discussed and proven, we find them consenting with us."
For there are no things that seem more ridiculous to the common people and those addicted only to exterior senses,
nor things that are more to be revered and divine among the noble and experienced.
For very many have been, and indeed distinguished by sharpness of intellect,
and endowed with excellent judgment, who at first glance would utterly judge these things to be trifles (so to speak):
but afterwards, they not only assented but yearned for them in a wonderful way,
and what then seemed utterly probable, now seemed contrary to them.
Among these, that is most important, that the beginning of all truth arises through the exterior senses.
Indeed, all these are to be scorned, when we have come (as
Origen teaches against Celsus) to the exercise of the interior senses by which
we use, when we deal with God, who flees every grasp of the exterior senses.
Nor indeed (as I believe) is it sufficient for complete blessedness that the soul
understands and loves God: although intellect and reason are said, according to [Marginal note: Aristotle.]
Aristotle, to be the whole man. For the complete man is a certain whole resulting from soul and body,
having all the operations of both senses,
even existing in the body: But of the exterior senses in the body, and through a body
subject to corruption: Of the interior senses, however, in a better body, into which
this animal body will be changed, as the apostle says: "It is sown an animal body," [Marginal note: Paul.]
"it will rise a spiritual body: It is sown in corruption, it will rise in incorruption:"
"It is sown in dishonor, it will rise in glory. It is sown in weakness, it will rise"
"in power." But (you will say) since we are in this valley of misery, clothed in this
corruptible body, we cannot use the interior senses. Hear (I pray) [Marginal note: The same.]
what Paul adds. "If (he says) there is an animal body, there is also a spiritual one: just as
it is written. The first man, or Adam, was made into a living soul, the last,
or later Adam, into a life-giving spirit. The first man is from the
earth, earthy: the second man is from heaven, heavenly." "He speaks (you will say) of Christ."
Listen to what follows. "As is the earthy, so are those who are earthy: and as is the heavenly,
so are those who are heavenly: Therefore, if we have borne the image of the earthy, let us also bear the image of the heavenly."
Both, therefore, according to Paul's opinion, seem to be in us, which I would [Marginal note: Paul.]
certainly not dare to say, unless taught by the apostle. "Only one (you will say)..."
ZZ

--- Page 863 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

We have a body, which is now corruptible: and it will become incorruptible through re-
[Marginal note: Paulus.] surrection, according to that saying of the apostle himself: "We await our Savior Jesus Christ, who will transform the body of our lowliness, conformed to the body of his glory." I ask, will a grain ever become a plant, unless the living body of the plant has it at least in potentiality, as all Peripatetics agree? For this [plant] arises from a dead grain, and our spiritual body, in which we bear the image of the heavenly, arises from the animal and corruptible body that has been put to death: either by this common death, which all un-
[Marginal notes: Idem. Psalmus. Paulus.] dergo and experience: or by that death, about which the same apostle says: "Mortify your members." And again: "It is written, 'For your sake we are put to death all day long.'" And with the Corinthians he says more openly: "Always bearing about in our body the mortification of Jesus Christ, so that the life of Jesus may be manifested in our bodies. For we who live are always delivered to death for Jesus' sake, so that the life of Jesus may also be manifested in our mortal flesh," about which we discussed more extensively a little earlier. This Paul is not raving, although these things may seem like ravings to those who have neither acknowledged Christ, nor a better life, nor a spiritual body. Behold how clearly he speaks

--- Page 864 ---
TONE TWO. 361

certain mortification we can have: so that with Christ we may live in the inner
man, indeed He Himself may live in him, as Paul said to the Galatians: "I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me." Which he also taught all of us to do, saying in
Corinthians: "Those who live, let them no longer live for themselves, but for Him who died for them
and rose again." Therefore, he who lives for Christ, or he in whom Christ lives, will assume
those better senses by which he can perceive all things that are of God and of Christ.
For then with unveiled face we are transformed into the same image from glory to
glory, always, that is, progressing, led by the Spirit of the Lord. To
this state had come not only the prophets and our first fathers, but also many
later generations: as we read of Benedict, Francis, [Marginal note: Benedi. Franci.] and others, who with a better
sight contemplated absent things, and foresaw those things which lay hidden from bodily
eyes, and being changed into a better state, were present to the absent. Thus Am- [Marginal note: Ambrof. Francisc.]
brose, being in Milan, was present at the funeral rites of blessed Martin...

--- Page 865 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

We shall perceive throughout the whole heaven the pervading fragrance of the most holy name, concerning which it is said:
[Marginal note: Canticle.] "Your name is oil poured out," and chrism, truly, redolent of every sweetness. Then
touches and embraces will be given there, concerning which it is again said: "His left hand is under my
[Marginal note: The same.] head, and his right hand will embrace me." So that man's delight may therefore be complete,
all those senses by which we sought God will always flourish, as is commanded in the law,
when it is enjoined that we love and seek God himself, not
only with soul, heart, and mind, but with all the powers, if any there are in man,
by which we can pursue God himself: so that just as by these we served God, so by the same
we may be delighted in God himself. Nor indeed will we use corruptible senses there,
because nothing corruptible will be in those eternal and incorruptible dwellings.
Therefore, with better senses, we will perpetually be delighted in God himself.

Concerning man's conformity with intelligences, heavens,
and sacred things. Third Tone.

[Decorative initial 'Q' depicting a figure in a landscape] What symbol, and what conformity man has with
angels. Chapter I.
Whether man is superior to angels, or the opposite. Chapter II.
What envy there was, and is, between angels and men. Chapter III.
Whether men agree with angels in number. Chapter IV.
With what most just balance He sent forth against us as enemies those who transgressed from among them. Chapter V.
What man can receive from the heavens, so that he may become better. Chapter VI.
From where the heavens receive favor, which harmonious favor they pour forth. Chapter VII.
What man has with the sacraments. Chapter VIII.
What man has with sacrifices. Chapter IX.
What man has with words and prayers, which support him. Chapter X.

--- Page 866 ---
TONE THREE. 363

WHAT SYMBOLISM, AND WHAT CONGRUENCE
man has with angels. Chapter One.

[Large decorative initial D in a square frame] MAN having been DISPOSED and tempered, and the
manner of his progress and reason assigned, as to the degrees
and gifts distributed to him, it must now be examined what
congruence he has with created beings: and especially with
angels, from whom, as from inseparable companions of his whole
journey, he may receive increments of progress. First, therefore, they agree by natural disposition,
since both are partakers of reason, capable of understanding, and tend to the same
end, servants of the same immediate Lord. Both likewise are incorruptible
and perpetual, but angels by an equal and continuous succession, man, however, according
to his better part, in the same way: but according to the other part, by a certain transformation,
concerning which it is said: "This corruptible shall put on incorruption." [Marginal note: Paul.]
Both also drink from the same fountain and rock, concerning which it is again said: "But they drank
of the spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ:" foreseen by them indeed,
but for us carved, erected, and filled with immense water, so that from its
fullness we may all fully receive. Because not only men, but also
angels draw from it, as Augustine says: "Angels consult Him, as [Marginal note: August. Peter.]
the fountain of life." Into Him also (as Peter says) angels desire to look:
so that they may always draw for themselves, and for us, whose care they have,
as long as we are confined in this bodily prison. And although they are said to differ
from men in appearance, nevertheless, they agree with them no less
than those (men) with horses, which they ride, and lead them at will with a small bridle,
and urge them on with a slight touch of the spurs, or a gesture of the body:
and instruct them, imparting a certain prudence for performing the journey.
Nor do they have less congruence with men, than they themselves (men) with birds,
which they train, either for hunting, or for singing, and for imitating human
speech. Thus they, presiding over us, guide, impel, and [Marginal note: Adam. Shem. Abraham. Isaac. Jacob. Joseph. Moses. Elijah. Peter.]
instruct us, so that we may capture the prey of heavenly things, and that we may bring back
divine words, more or less according to our capacity, and according to the diligence
we show, so that we may listen to them, and make them familiar to us.
Hence the ancient fathers diligently strove to adhere to them, and to have
familiar companionship with them. For thus (as I found in the most ancient Hebrew
monuments) Adam had familiar intercourse with the angel Raziel: Shem, son of Noah,
with Jophiel: Abraham, however, had Zadkiel as a familiar: Isaac and Jacob, Peliel: Joseph, Ga-
briel: Moses, Metatron: Elijah, Maltiel. And in the evangelical family, Peter had
an angel not only for himself, but also familiar to his other friends, so much so that when Peter came
from prison to the house of Mary, his hostess, knocking, she, with the other friends,
aware of his custom, which Peter had with an angel, said, "It is his an-
ZZ iij

--- Page 867 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

[Marginal notes: Iohan. Cecilia Agnes.] Thus John had an angel, who would show and teach him the sacraments of the most celebrated vision. Thus Cecilia had an angel, whom she would show to her husband and brother-in-law. Thus Agnes had a perceptible angel, so that it might even guard her in a brothel. And many others had familiar guardian angels, whom this brief summary of things does not permit to commemorate. Also from sacred writings we have that everyone has their own guardian angel, although they do not enjoy its domestic familiarity, because this is given to few and the purest. But if, knowing the symbol and congruence we have with them, and how pleasant and profitable their familiarity is to us, they would always seek their favor, taking them as friends to the best of their ability, so that now [Marginal note: Franci.] Francis might be set as an example for us. For he celebrated the forty days of blessed Michael the Archangel with strict fasting and careful diligence: he also chose places in which he believed them to be more propitious, namely the place of Saint Mary of the Angels, Mount La Verna, (as it is said) specially dedicated to angels. This is observed and sought by those who are wise in spiritual matters, and to whom the order of things in God, from whom they proceeded, is somehow known. For it is that those things which possess a lower place are led to the highest through intermediaries.

**Whether man is superior to angels, or vice versa. Chapter II.**

[Large initial E] And because we have said that man, as an inferior, is led to God through an angel, I deem it by no means to be omitted here to discuss whether the angel presiding over us, or ministering, is nobler, or man guarded by him and receiving the ministry. For that well-known sentence in the Davidic song [Marginal note: Dauid.], which the prophet sings when speaking of man, seems to press hard upon [this idea]: "Thou hast made him a little less than the angels." As well as those things [Marginal note: August.] which are said by Augustine, that He made the angel near Himself, as more worthy and excellent than other things created by Him. For those things which approach closer to the first and most perfect cause seem to be more perfect. And since angels, again, are above time, and produced with a certain aeviternity, and removed from burdensome matter, they seem nobler. Some add that an angel, because it is intellectual, is considered more worthy than man who is rational. And they try to prove it with the oracle of Ezekiel [Marginal note: Ezechi.], where it is said: "Thou art the seal of likeness." By which words (as some explain) something more seems to be attributed to the angel than to man, who was made in the image of God. For if they judge something more perfect to be implied [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] by the "seal of likeness" than by "image." Standing against these, we take from infallible truth that he who reclines is greater than he who ministers. [Marginal note: Paulus.] But concerning angels, Paul says: "Are they not all ministering spirits, not only indeed of God, but also of men, sent forth for those who are to inherit salvation?" Some say that angels minister to us, not as to nobler beings, but as to the weak and those in need of their protection. To whom we say,

--- Page 868 ---
**TONVS TERTIVS. 364**

that angels carried into Abraham's bosom the soul of Lazarus, not infirm,
but freed from the body and enlightened. And although a child sometimes needs
the guidance of a tutor, yet he is greater than the tutor, soon to possess a kingdom.
But we, whom angels serve, are to possess the kingdom prepared for us, not for an-
gels, from the foundation of the world. Whence also our condition is concluded to be
better than the condition of angels. Which also the order of creation declares: For
the last work of God was man: who was first and more excellent in the divine mind,
according to the common opinion of philosophers, by which it is said: What is first in in- [Marginal note: Philoso.]
tention, is last in execution. But man was the last work of God, intro-
duced into this world, as its steward, as into a house already built
and prepared. Since moreover Christ as man is considered nobler than angels,
we can conclude human nature to be nobler, by that Aristotelian principle
admitted by all: When the best in this kind is better than the best of that
kind, this kind is nobler than that. And unless Christ and the Blessed Virgin were
nobler than angels, they could never have transcended their choirs and ranks.
But concerning Christ, Paul says: "Having become so much better than the angels, as he has [Marginal note: Paulus.]
inherited a more excellent name than they." But omitting many things which are adduced
by some to save their opinion concerning the nobility of angels, I will address one
of their strongest points, namely that the soul of Christ was nobler by grace,
granted that by nature it was inferior. Which indeed, if well considered,
will seem to be far from the truth: since gratuitous gifts (as we explained above)
are given according to the dispositions of nature. And let that of the apostle be weighed (I ask),
that he is so much better than the angels, as he has obtained a more worthy name.
Which name, indeed, was not imposed by chance and improperly, as ours
are imposed daily: but was most fitting for the one named, and fashioned
in the college of the most holy Trinity: where both the ranks of things and all proper-
ties, even individual ones, are known. And if Adam, with a small light
imparted, knew how to impose names on things according to their property:
did not the Most Holy Trinity, and the origin of all light, know better? From this
indeed Gabriel was sent to announce the birth to the Virgin, with a command concerning
the name to be given to the son, whose conception he was announcing. God also took care
to add one character to Abraham's name, so that it might be more fitting for the one named.
What do we believe concerning the name imposed on the Son, and on Christ as man, whom He
loved and honored above all? If therefore He gave to this one a name more honorable than
to angels: He also made the one named more honorable. Indeed, I will not say
according to divinity, because angels could not be worthily compared to Him, since He
exceeds them by infinity and an immense interval. So much so that according to that
no comparison can be made. It remains therefore that Christ as man is more honorable,
just as He inherited a more excellent name. I will also add one thing, which greatly ex-
plains the nobility of man: because he contains within himself the structure of the world, ange-
ZZ iiij

--- Page 869 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

Man, and the archetype, as we explained above, therefore has a more express image of God, in whom all His most beautiful characteristics shine forth. Nor is that prophetic saying compelling, by which it is said that man was made a little lower than the angels, since in truth the letters have ותחסרהו מעט מאלהים vate chasrehu mehat me-elohim. Which, if translated word for word, has: "Thou hast made him a little lower, or a little less than God:" for Elohim signifies God, although sometimes angels, and sometimes judges: but in this place (as the wise Hebrews commonly understand) it signifies God. Which is implied by the words that immediately follow: "And Thou hast set him over the works of Thy hands." Therefore man is not inferior to angels, because they themselves are also works of God's hands: And how much God Himself made [Marginal note: Paul.] man, Paul implies, when he says: "He took not on him the nature of angels, but the seed of Abraham," as if, namely, more capable of union than angels. Further, more esoteric Theologians proceed, explaining that [Hebrew letter] Ayin by numbers: For those letters yield 119: Ayin (ע) given as 40: Yod (י) 9: Nun (ן) 70: which numbers joined together yield 119. Where there is one hundred, one ten, and the whole number, up to the ten itself exclusively. Which is a great mystery, and is hidden among those who know the art of divine and natural numbers, about which it is not permitted to speak at present. As for Augustine saying that God made the angel worthier and more perfect near Himself. This is true as regards the immediate act, with which, however, it can stand that man was made nobler in potential, to be sometimes brought to act: and then man, having completed his course, will appear nobler, who, while he was under a tutor, seemed less noble. We will say the same regarding what was said about angels existing above time, because men also will be above time, when they enjoy eternal beatitude. But what is brought forward in the fourth place, that the angel is intellective, and man rational, is of no account: since man is also intellectual, as agrees [Marginal note: Aristotle. David. CHRIST.] Aristotle, saying: "Man is pre-eminently intellect, and reason." Nor would the royal prophet, unless he had felt himself capable of intellect, so often repeat: "Give me understanding." And the supreme truth, as if reproaching His disciples, says: "Are you still without understanding?" For there is a threefold intellect: divine and pure; likewise separate, and angelic; moreover mixed, and human. But when he will be freed from bodily bonds, he will not only attain to the angelic intellect, but transcending it, will apply himself to the divine, to be united with it, more happily than an angel: as many passages of sacred scripture resound. In which we have that man is made a son of God: and is transformed into the same image, which is God, and is united with Him: which things are nowhere read of angels. That also about the signet, or seal, collapses by itself. For in Hebrew it is found אתה חותם תכנית atah chotem tabnit, that is, "Thou seal of likeness." Nor have I ever found that a seal or signet says something [Marginal note: Augustine.] greater than an image. Augustine rightly says that the image of God is in man as if—

--- Page 870 ---
**VOLUME THREE. 365**

in the seal, but in Christ, as in a son. Into which image it is sometimes given to us to be transformed, while angels remain with the image of the seal, which is inferior. Or if it is said that an angel is the seal of the image, this is irrelevant, since that which is sealed is always nobler than the seal. Therefore, the seal in an angel argues nothing of nobility. Thus, man remains nobler, whom the angel serves, and rejoices in his progress: as we have learned from the Gospel: and reports some utility, since every agent acts for an end, indeed a useful and delightful one, unless there is an error in the operator. But since the angel is not deceived, he has that useful end which God knows, and to whom God wills to reveal it.

What envy there was and is between angels and men. Chapter III.

**W**hen, however, the angel saw a more express image, and greater perfection in man than in himself, from this perhaps he took the reason to envy him. For envy is sadness over another's good, with the desire either of depriving the one who has that good, or of surpassing him. Therefore, by this envy (as the Wise Man says) death entered into the world: because the angel of death seduced and subjected man, bringing death upon him, lest he should attain that lot from which he himself had been expelled. Nor is it to be thought that the angel envied God, who is so immensely exalted that there is no place for man or angel to emulate Him. But he knew the rank of man, and the most perfect end appointed for him, and the dominion that one man was to obtain. And this, when (as Paul says) God the Father introduced Him, the firstborn, into the world, saying: "And let all His angels worship Him." He also saw whence He would draw His origin here, and His future birth, as John testifies in the Apocalypse, saying: "A great sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun of divinity, and superior beauty, and the moon of light, and natural grace under her feet. And on her head a crown of twelve stars," that is, of all graces and gifts, since all heavenly things are divided by the number twelve. "And being with child, she cried out, travailing in birth," not indeed with a voice of pain, but of exultation, or of terror, which the one to be born ought to strike into all the powers and virtues of the world: whence it follows: "And she bore a son, who was to rule the nations with a rod of iron:" according to that psalm: "The Lord said to me, 'You are my Son, today I have begotten you. Ask of me, and I will give you the nations for your inheritance, and the ends of the earth for your possession. And you shall rule them with a rod of iron.'" Hence, fearing and envying, the great dragon stood before the woman who was about to give birth, so that he might devour her son. And from this arose a great battle in heaven: Michael and his angels fought with the dragon and his angels, but these did not prevail, nor was their place found any longer in heaven. And lest anyone should doubt who this dragon was, it adds: "And that great dragon was cast out, who is the Devil and Satan." And since this son was not only to rule the world with a rod of iron, but, being exalted, to draw from—

ZZ v
[Marginal note: Sapiens.]
[Marginal note: Paulus.]
[Marginal note: Iohan.]
[Marginal note: psalmus.]

--- Page 871 ---
CANTICI TERTII

but exalted to draw to himself all things, especially his brothers, and the elect: therefore, agitated by envy, he lay in wait for all of us. For he bore it ill, and was ashamed, that man, hindered by an earthly body, should obtain what he himself had lost, and should win the battle in which he himself had succumbed. For a battle was given to both: because he who does not contend lawfully ought not to be crowned. To both also a precept was given, the transgression of which is sin:
[Marginal note: Paulus] as Paul often repeats with the Romans, saying: "When the law is removed, sin is removed. And if there were no law, sin would not be imputed." Therefore, a law was given to the angels: that they should adore the firstborn of God: A law was given to man, that he should not eat, that is, that he should not emulate the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, which is Christ, as we explained above. But both transgressed the precept:
[Marginal note: Bernar.] the former by not revering God's chief son: the latter by emulating his rank, which was particularly forbidden to him. Here some wise men agree, Bernard especially, who, taught by the contemplation of God, while explaining that passage from Jonah, says: "This storm came on account of me." It is the word of the Son saying: "This storm came on account of me among the angels, and our first parents:" In the former, because they

--- Page 872 ---
**THIRD TONE. 366**

...moving. But the examples brought forward concerning the pipe and the organ object, where from one source a breath sounds, from another a hand moves. And lest we seem by a witty example to wish to shake a solid (as they say) philosopher, let us bring forward a few, though from many, invincible reasons. It is pleasing what some bring forward to prove the numerousness of intelligences. For they presuppose order, without which the universe cannot stand: and this order is threefold, namely, for being, for operation, and for end. Or to superiors, inferiors, and equals, especially when the intermediates are ordered. For what glory is there for a Duke if, forgetting the emperor or king, he looks only to the soldiers? What does a bishop do with his clergy, having disregarded the supreme pontiff, or Christ, whom he represents? And what wise person will ever conceive of those celestial minds being so occupied with the revolution of the heavens that they look to nothing else? Or even (as some wish) that they are blessed in the influence and generation of inferiors, and not rather [Aristotle] in the Creator, from whom they receive: whence they influence? This is especially true since Aristotle himself teaches that if the soul were continuously moved, it would never attain a blessed life: because blessed life itself is rather in rest than in active or passive motion. Therefore, there is an order of intelligences not only to the heavens, which they move, and to themselves moving each other, but to God from whom they receive,

--- Page 873 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

will reign. For we do not know the number either of holy men or of unclean
demons, into whose place the children of the Catholic mother, succeeding, will remain without any end.
[Marginal note: Moses.] But Moses seems to equate the number of both families, angelic and human, saying: "You have set the boundaries of the peoples according to the number of the children of Israel," that is, of those who rule, or who walk rightly under God. For we can rightly interpret "peoples" as men, and "children of Israel" as angels (as some prefer): who are taken both for angels and for the elect, who "will be like the angels of God," concerning whom it is said: "I have not come except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel," that is, to all who are to be saved, who, from whatever family they may be, are called children of Israel, their reasons for the time being omitted.

      *With what most just balance he has sent forth those who have transgressed*
      *from among them as enemies against us.*           Chapter V.

[Decorative initial E] And just as from among those who are faithful, a proper guardian has been assigned to each one, so from among the rebellious, an enemy is sent forth, so that from this, we may gain not ignominy and damage, but profit and glory. Hence, mankind unjustly complains about these assigned enemies:
[Marginal note: Paulus, Orige.] especially, since they contend with us with an equal balance and a compensated struggle. For (says Paul) "God does not allow you to be tempted beyond what you are able, but with the temptation will also provide the way of escape." Where Origen says: "Unless the virtue of those contending is equal, there will be no just palm for the victor." Therefore, those who preside over contests do not allow those who come to the struggle to enter into contests haphazardly among themselves, but with diligent examination, according to what they observe of their bodies or age, joining one with another with the most equal comparison, by this law and edict, that the victor be master, and the vanquished be a servant, according to that saying of Peter: "By whom one is overcome,"
[Marginal note: Petrus.] "by him he is enslaved." And the devil, vanquished and subdued, like a wasp with a broken sting (as I have heard from trustworthy sources), can no longer trouble another. Origen supports this,
[Marginal note: Orige.] saying: "I truly believe that the saints, fighting against these enemies and conquering, diminish the army of demons, so that it is no longer permissible for one who has been overcome by someone to attack another." Thus, the enemy fights against us, and our genius (guardian spirit) and guardian fight with us against that enemy: so that the struggle of flesh and spirit is the same: and that which is of the devil presiding over the flesh and its lust, with the angel strengthening the spirit. Hence, in that great contest, Michael fought for the prince, and his angels for his soldiers. But the Dragon fought against the prince of the human race himself, and against the prince of angels fighting for the same. And his satellites (followers) fought against the soldiers of the prince and their angels: so that the battle is always equal, prince against prince, and soldiers against soldiers. Therefore, man, in the midst of these contenders, grants victory to whomever he wishes, and thereby obtains it himself,
[Marginal note: Hiero.] as Jerome rightly says: "Weak is the enemy who does not conquer unless one is willing." For whatever great things are proclaimed about the enemy, that he is most cunning, and like a lurking serpent, or rages like a roaring lion, and that these are his names

--- Page 874 ---
VOLUME THREE. 367

[names] a thousand, because there are a thousand arts of harming, yet all these things are balanced with the virtue, prudence, and sagacity of our guardian, and of the divine splendor cherishing us and helping us against the guest of darkness. And unless man willingly surrenders himself, the angels of life and light prevail against the angels of death and darkness. For there are two paths (says Barnabas in Origen's *Peri Archon*) [Marginal note: Barnabas. Origen.] set before us, one of light, and the other of darkness: by the former, the angel of light strives to lead us, but by the latter, the angel of darkness, and Satan. Which paths in Ecclesiasticus are called life and death: [Marginal note: Ecclesiasticus.] evil and good. But man He left in the hand of his own counsel, although for both he has guides and tempters. But the angel of light is to be listened to, with whom we have a covenant and friendship: and he is to be rejected, between whom and us from the beginning were placed implacable and most bitter enmities: so that our soul and spirit may always shudder and be disturbed

--- Page 875 ---
**CANTO III**

Pythagoras and Plato speak of the most consonant influxes flowing into us,
[Marginal note: Pytha. Plato. Cicero. Macro.] especially in the republic; whom Cicero follows in a book under the same title. But Macrobius, in the first book of *On Scipio's Dream*, resuming their sayings, says: "When you gaze at the sky, you are amazed. That (I say) is what fills my ears, such a great and sweet sound. This (he says) is that which, with unequal intervals, but nevertheless in due proportion, distinct by reason, is produced by the impulse and motion of the spheres themselves; and tempering the high with the low, it produces various equally harmonious sounds. For the starry heaven, whose revolution is more excited, makes a sharper sound; but the lunar (sphere) is the gravest, by a violent motion, by which the upper sphere moves more quickly. But by its own motion, the lower (sphere) is faster and sharper; the upper, however, is slower and graver. Which harmony is indeed most beautiful, and most sweet in its reciprocation; so much so that no song is sweeter than this, which is derived from numbers and measures, like the motion of the spheres: as we have clearly proven. Nor is there less harmony in the signs of the starry
[Marginal note: Plato.] heaven: to which (as Plato says) Sirens are appointed, who are called songs, because presiding over them, they render harmonious influxes."

From where the heavens receive the favor which they harmonically infuse. Chapter VII

[Marginal note: Idem. Apoca.] [Large decorative initial Q] What those Sirens are, Plato was silent, but from sacred scripture (if I am not mistaken) we can learn. For this (scripture) relates (as we read in the Apocalypse) that twelve angels preside over the twelve gates of that celestial city: who revolve with supreme and tireless harmony, and flow into those gates, which (as it pleases the Academics) are the signs of the starry heaven: of which Capricorn is the principal gate of ascent, and Cancer of descent; the other signs, however, agree with one or the other of these. But into these revolving signs flow many kinds of angels (arranged, however, under those twelve princes) that multiple and most sweet influx, and full of all kinds of harmony, which they receive from the divine name, revolved twelve times: as the Hebrews hold for certain.
[Marginal note: Hebræi Iohan.] Concerning which John (says) in the same place: "And in the foundations of that city are the names of the twelve apostles, and of the Lamb." For the Lamb does not have twelve names: but that great name (as we said above) in which alone it is necessary for men to be saved. Therefore, we obtain salvation in this name through Christ who inherited that very name: and this (salvation) through angels, through the heavens, and through every creature: because all things work together for good for those who love God, for those who are called saints according to His purpose. For to these, both the influxes of the heavens, and the power of angels, and every creature favors, just as conversely, the same every creature
[Marginal note: Sapiens.] arms itself to conquer the enemies of God, as we read in the Book of Wisdom. John also mentions the seven spirits who are before the throne of God, whom many affirm to preside
[Marginal note: Mercu.] over the seven planets. Hence Mercury calls these seven governors, because, namely, through the seven planets, which they move, they moderate all things, even the influx of the twelve signs. And how great the consonance, infer from this—

--- Page 876 ---
TONVS TERTIVS. 368

we can, because each number results from the same root. For three and four constitute seven. But one of them multiplied by the other yields twelve. Therefore the heavens receive from angels, whence they may flow in and favor good, but those [angels] from the great name of God: Whose virtue is primarily in God, afterwards diffused into those twelve and seven angels, through whom it extends into the twelve signs and seven planets: and consequently into all ministers and instruments of God himself. So also it is in this world, or the mystical spiritual body: For the virtue of the great name of God existing in Christ, and completing with all perfection, is afterwards diffused into those twelve apostles, as into twelve signs, and chief foundations after Christ of the celestial and spiritual edifice. For (as the apostle says) we are founded upon the foundation of the a- [Marginal note: Paulus.] postles and prophets: from whom also the seventy-two disciples, and all bishops and prelates, who are in the place of the ancient fathers, and of those who were, as it were, the first foundations laid of this sacred edifice: and consequently all who are governed by them. For they were the primary foundation stones of this new city descending from heaven, and radiating stars, or signs of the firmament, but better, of the heavens. Who were first filled with the divine power of the Son, and the anointing of the Holy Spirit, according to that of the Davidic hymn. By the word of the Lord were the heavens established, and [Marginal note: Dauid] by the breath of his mouth all their host. Afterwards, what they received, they diffused into others: as the prophet sings in another song: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the [Marginal note: Idem.] firmament proclaims the work of his hands. And again: The heavens declared his [Marginal note: Dauid] righteousness, and all the peoples saw his glory. Behold therefore how both heavens, both of this machine and of the spiritual edifice, influence only as much as they are imbued and filled by supercelestial virtue: so that concerning both heavens that of the same divine prophet can be sung. For the heavens dripped from the face of God Sinai, from the face of the Lord Israel: Indeed, they dripped voluntary or spontaneous rain (that is, any influx whatsoever), because it is not diffused by any natural necessity, but by God's benevolence into his peculiar inheritance, when it has been capable of his influx. For not all receive spiritual charismata from God through the heavens and angels: although all rejoice in the common benefit of the rains, which the eternal Father commands to descend upon the just and the unjust: and they enjoy the bodily light of the sun, which he causes to rise upon the good and the evil.

What man has with the sacraments. Chapter VIII.

[Decorative initial letter Q depicting a figure in a landscape] Although the supreme moderator is most simple to each and omnipotent: yet many times he acts with us, with angels, heavens, and other suitable intervening means, which have a symbol with both. For the heavens, which are distributed by twelve and seven, derived from three and four, participate through three in divinity: but through four in the nature of lower things.

--- Page 877 ---
OF THE THIRD CANTICLE

Angels also have many things in common with God, and many things with man sojourning (on earth): therefore they are mediating ministers, until that better fortune shall be given to man himself, which may not need angelic favor. Yet not content with these, the most pious Father established other means, by which He might deal more intimately with us. And these are the sacraments and sacrifices, which partake of the nature of both, or analogically represent those divine things. For human defilements are washed away by that super-mundane water, which is the Son of God, and the Wisdom of God, and the Word of God, which sustains and heals all things: and He also who alone bore the sins of the world, making purification for sins. Hence, as a sign of this washing, this elemental water was ordained, whose purpose it is to wash away the defilements of bodies, and to signify that water which washes all stains of the soul and spirit. For these defilements could not be washed away, except by that water which is God's piety, cle-
[Marginal note: Hebrew Theologians] -mency, grace, and mercy; so much so that even the Theologians of the Hebrews are compelled to confess that the Messiah must purify man by water, who in the fiery law was purified by blood, justice thus demanding, which not
[Marginal note: John] omitting, but perfecting, Christ came (as John says) not in water only, but in water and blood. And since beyond washing, we also need to be strengthened, oil for anointing and strengthening was ordained: Which has such a correspondence with the divine name, from which is all delightful virtue,
[Marginal note: Song of Songs] and strengthening, that the name itself is called in the Song of Songs "poured out oil." And it has a correspondence with the Holy Spirit, who solidifies, binds, and anoints all things, so that it is called chrism, anointing, and bond. And just as the richness of oil and flesh together seasons all dishes and strengthens them for our nourishment, so the richness and chrism of this Holy Spirit seasons all our works: so that like well-seasoned dishes, they may be placed on the table of the highest king. For without His grace diffused in our hearts and sprinkling us, all our works are tasteless and of no nourishment. Therefore by this oil infants are strengthened, and those departing from us, and when someone is perfected as a king or priest, or constituted as a bishop. And because all created nature continually fails, it continually needs food and nourishment; hence He instituted another sacrament, namely bread and wine: which have the greatest symbolism with Him who is called the living bread and the true vine, given indeed as food and drink for nourishing our better man. Bread and wine also have such a correspondence and symbolism with us: that there is no more suitable nourishment for us. There remains the sacrament of penance, which is exhibited through the word, representing that Word by whose power all things are purified, and the purification of sins is effected. Which Word is also sought in the first sacrament, made complete both by word and by element: And if matrimony is a sacrament, that also is completed by a word. Therefore man has the greatest symbolism with the sacraments: which are means between God tempering souls, and this soul to be tempered, and finally to be united with Him. Habet

--- Page 878 ---
TOMVS TERTIVS. 369

Moreover, man has a covenant with these by divine institution, since God's will does not have less power and efficacy in instituting anew than it had from the beginning, when it simultaneously imparted law, order, and being to things. Yet it instituted sacramental signs which would be fitting for the things signified and for those receiving them. Which we have lightly sketched, reserving for its proper place the declaration of how man becomes better through these sacraments.

What man has with sacrifices. Chapter IX.

[N] Not only, however, sacraments, but also sacrifices have been ordained as symbolic intermediaries for both. For they have a certain symbol with that to whom they are offered, and with those who are expiated: but so hidden that human intellects cannot grasp it: although all confess sacrifices to be necessary: and that they are certain quasi-natural intermediaries between God and man. For to sacrifice to God (says Ari- [Marginal note: Aristotle:] stotle) is from nature. However, the offering of this or that sacrifice, for this or that expiation, although it may be most fitting by natural order, is nevertheless instituted by law: since human intellects cannot discover or devise those things which God specifically requires for our expiation according to the order of celestial things, with the things to be expiated themselves, and the expiating sacrifices, so that the celestial powers may be rendered placated: and may restrain themselves from the execution of punishment, which those perpetrated sins deserved. For the blood of animals seems to purge the sin contracted in the flesh and blood of our animal nature: according to that of the Apostle. [Marginal note: Paul:] Almost all things are cleansed in blood. Almost (he says) because earthen and bronze vessels were cleansed with water. Nor was it without reason that man, who is the bond of all things, and contains all things, and has the greatest symbol in his lower part, in which and through which the beginning of sin is contracted, was purged with animals through the blood of immaculate animals: until the immaculate lamb was offered, supplying the place of all things that were offered. For he bore and purged the sins of all so much more perfectly, inasmuch as he himself is a more renowned bond of all creatures, rational and irrational, and insensible, and celestial. Therefore, the shed blood of animals was received into the holy places, together with the sins of those for whom it was shed: until he came, who by his own blood entered once into the holy places, having found eternal redemption.

What man has with words and prayers which support him. Chapter X.

[E] And because man is purged and perfected, not only by words expressed in the sacraments, but also in hymns, prayers, and however they may be duly expressed: therefore, what man also has with these words themselves must be surveyed. For words are intermediaries between the speaker AAA

--- Page 879 ---
OF THE THIRD CANTICLE

...and the listener, conveying not only the concept but also the power of the speaker, with a certain energy into the listeners and those who are receptive. Hence they change not only the listeners but often other things as well. For Christ would not have said, "in my name they will cast out demons," unless there were a certain power in that name when expressed, over demons, and the sick, and such like. [Marginal note: CHRIST] Words also move wisely and in their own ways those who chant. And this happens either from a power inherent in the words, or from the power of things explained through words, which are like vehicles of the power of the expressed thing. Furthermore, words are (especially Hebrew ones) certain signs and sacraments of heavenly things: whence they have the power as if of sacraments; and this, either from the power of the institutor, or from that representation of sacred things, as is said concerning the more celebrated sacraments. And because Hebrew words, both divine and heavenly, and also natural, represent more expressly and more mysteriously, therefore Orpheus commands that "barbarian names" – i.e., Hebrew ones in sacred rites – are not to be changed, if we wish to operate effectively. [Marginal note: Orpheus] And beyond the efficacy that words have, whether from a certain power inherent in them, or from the divine and sacred things they represent, or from wherever it may be, another power is also found in complex prayers, from the truth contained in them, which has the greatest power of impressing, changing, and establishing, so much so that when agitated, it shines more, and when attacked, it is more strengthened and consolidated. Which truth is not in simple and uncomplicated words, but in enunciations, in which something is affirmed or denied. Therefore, from these true and sacred prayers, which we utter with mind, or inner sense, we acquire great power. This especially, when they are directed towards God, to whom, by applying ourselves, we move Him to direct towards us His words, full of favoring divine power, through a divine ray, by which (according to Dionysius) He speaks to us: but so secretly that few perceive it. [Marginal note: Diony.] But he perceived it who said: "I will hear what the Lord God speaks in me." [Marginal note: David] Therefore, prayers offered to God and hymns sung never return empty, provided that we do not utter those words empty of meaning, spoken only by mouth and not from the heart, to be quickly dissolved into the air; but if we direct them with full meaning and effective mind to God Himself, just as an arrow is directed by a powerful hand from a drawn bow.

--- Page 880 ---
FOURTH TONE. 370

Concerning the correspondence of all things with the well-hearted man, so that he can operate in all things, and command all things. Fourth Tone.

[Decorative initial D] Concerning a certain hidden correspondence of things among themselves, from which one wonderfully operates upon another. Chapter I.
Those things which agree among themselves meet much more happily in man, who is the most perfect bond of all things, and, above all, supported by divinity. Chapter II.
That the well-hearted man becomes a prophet, sometimes by the manifold support of inferior things. Chapter III.
Who and from where a true prophet is made. Chapter IIII.
An Apology for Prophecy. Chapter V.
Well-hearted men draw all things to themselves. Chapter VI.
Men placed in their proper place and well-ordered, easily dominate all things. Chapter VII.
From where this power of dominating comes, how it was lost, and how it was restored. Chapter VIII.
Various and wonderful conditions of operating and dominating. Chapter IX.
What are natural works, what are false, and what are true miracles, and what is the legitimate power of dominating. Chapter X.
The well-hearted man is heard in his wishes concerning whatever thing he has asked. Chapter XI.
Only the well-hearted man lives joyfully with God. Chapter XII.

AAA ij

--- Page 881 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD
CONCERNING A CERTAIN HIDDEN HARMONY OF THINGS AMONG THEMSELVES, WHENCE ONE MIRACULOUSLY OPERATES UPON ANOTHER. Chapter One.

[Marginal note: Trisme.] [Decorative initial E in a square frame with floral patterns] The most excellent craftsman God fashioned (as Trismegistus says) two images of himself, namely the world and man, in one of which he might play, and in the other indeed he might enjoy delights. For in the world he plays with certain wondrous operations, not by qualitative, or elemental, or sidereal virtue alone: but by a certain power hidden from human intellects, unless insofar as he deigns to reveal it to his friends. Indeed, it is known to all that a certain virtue resides in the magnet, by which it attracts iron: and in amber and jet, that when heated by rubbing they draw straw. But whence it comes, or what it is, no one among those who fill immense volumes concerning the properties of things has yet revealed. Nor whence the Aetites (eagle-stone) has it, that it strengthens the fetus of women and plants when placed above, and draws them when placed below. Nor whence jasper stops blood, and the Echneis (which is also called remora) stops a ship. Nor whence coral, when hung, produces some joy in man, and the hyacinth, the best companion of travelers, confers strength. Nor whence rhubarb (which the Arabs call rauend) expels cholera from the human body: and many medicines draw out and expel very diverse humors: and many such things, concerning which it would be tedious to discuss each individually. We also see many animals, by a certain inherent, wondrous, and prophetic power. The rooster most skillfully indicates the hours by its crowing, and puts a lion to flight with open wings. Many birds also, by song and chirping, and flies by a sharp sting, announce future rain: and dolphins, by frequent leaps above the [Marginal note: Cicero] water, precede a storm. And (to touch upon particulars) roosters (as Cicero writes) in Thebaid, by crowing throughout the nights, foretold that victory for the Boeotians against the Lacedaemonians. [Marginal note: Augures] Whence the augurs interpreted that bird to be silent if conquered, but to crow if victorious. Also, a monkey showed a great omen to the Spartans, which the king of the Molossians kept as a pet. For when they had asked Jupiter Dodonaeus, inquiring about victory, and the envoys had placed that in which they had cast lots, it disturbed the lots themselves, and the other things that had been prepared for the lot, scattering one from another. Then the priestess, who was in charge of the oracle, is said to have said: The Lacedaemonians should think about their safety, not about victory. The liver of a chameleon [Marginal note: Democ.] (as Democritus attests), when burned on the highest tiles, excites rains and thunder. The Ligurian stone (as has been proven) removes wondrous veils from the eyes. It would be tedious to recount all the omens which the Phrygians, Pisidians, Cilicians, Arabs, Umbrians, Tuscans, and other peoples learned from birds, [Marginal note: Panę.] who followed auguries. And although Panaetius and Carneades ridicule them, since these auspices often [Marginal note: Carne.] fail: whom Cicero follows after many examples adduced concerning divination by birds and animal entrails. Nevertheless, this has been more often proven: And what is more

--- Page 882 ---
**FOURTH TONE.** **371**

it happens that some birds prophesy from the right, like the raven; some from the left, like the crow. Moreover, some inanimate things also seemed to prognosticate. Did not the darkened stars, and the air, and the moved earth, and split stones, present a certain sadness at the death of Christ, the Lord of all things? Which we also read happened at other times at the death of certain kings. For the sun presages in many ways: for sometimes it seemed to mourn, as for example Caesar's fall, as the Poet writes. *The sun will give you signs, who can say the sun is false* [Marginal note:] Virgil *Dare? He also often warns that blind tumults are at hand, fraud, and hidden wars are swelling. He also, pitying Rome when Caesar was extinguished, when he covered his bright head with dark rust.* And concerning the lower elements another prophet sings, saying. *And also often foretells future winds the swollen sea, when suddenly, and deeply it swells, and the curved rocks of salt foamed with snowy liquid* etc., which are said there. Also, a river stained with blood, and a shower of stones, of blood, and sometimes even of milk, foretold many slaughters of the Romans, as Cicero testifies. [Marginal note:] Cicero. And wars and pernicious seditions were preceded by the greatest conflict of earthquakes. And in these times an earthquake indicated the capture of Byzantium: most recently, however, it indicated war for the Venetians, slaughter for the Bolognese, and horrible misfortunes for many regions. The Highest Truth also testifies that the terrifying day of universal judgment is to be announced [Marginal note:] CHRIST. by great earthquakes, which will be in various places, and also by other unusual and wondrous portents: whence it is proven that earthquakes are brought forth, just as winds from the treasures of God. But these (winds) are more often for the utility of men, while those (earthquakes) are to warn them about evil events, as Pythagoras rightly thinks: [Marginal note:] Pythag. although most philosophers say that they proceed from a natural cause. But since this is not the case, they cannot discover it. Hence they have wandered through many things. For Anaxagoras said the cause of earthquakes was ether: [Marginal note:] What is the cause of an earthquake] Empedocles fire: Democritus and Thales of Miletus water: Aristotle, Theophrastus, & Albertus wind, or subterranean vapor: Asclepiades a fall, or ruin: Thus Possidonius, Metrodorus, Callisthenes, Parcas, Seneca, & others drawn in different directions, never discovered the cause of that effect: which is from the highest Moderator, either by immediate command, or through commanded ministers, or by a certain force infused into things, and to be unfolded into effect at will, to foretell slaughters, which commonly follow an earthquake: as even Aristotle confesses in Mneoris. [Marginal note:] Aristotle. This prophetic power is also inherent in other things. For the Marsic war was foretold by the sweat and blood of statues, and by voices. But the ruin of the Privernate territory was preceded by a roar heard from the sky, and observed globes, three moons, and torches seen in the night. The destruction of Jerusalem was preceded by swords raging in the sky, the noise of the temple gates moving with no one seen moving them, and many other prodigies. And in our time, in the territory of Modena, before the very last surrender of that city and before the wars carried out in that region, globes fighting among themselves were seen by very many trustworthy people. Indeed, I would not encompass examples in an immense volume if all were adduced, which by a certain foreboding preceded many events: but let these few things be said: so that the gathering of things may be understood: and their mutual in-

**AAA iij**

--- Page 883 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

the reciprocal arrangement and operation through the harmony of things, which the Greeks call sympathy: and from this it is learned that all these things exist in a more perfect way in man, who is the bond of all things, and embraces all things.

Those things which agree among themselves, much more fortunately meet in man, who is the most perfect bond of all things, and supported by divinity above all things. Chapter II.

[Large decorative initial E] X the mutual correspondence of things (as we have explained) one operates upon the other with a certain wonderful and hidden power. Therefore it is not surprising if man, since he has both the image and the symbol of all things, can operate in all things. This indeed he accomplishes, provided he enjoys his due temperament and presides over himself: so that he may deservedly rule among other things. For to the man who presides well over himself, God, operating all things, is present and inherent: as not only Paul, [Marginal note: Paulus] and our writings, but also external wise men assert. For Plato teaches this in Ion: [Marginal note: Plato. Mercur. Xistus.] and in Parmenides: Mercury in Pymander, and Xistus the Pythagorean, who says that man is the temple of God, and God is the guest. Which the Poet also twice sings in his verses: God is in us, and there are dealings with heaven: From ethereal abodes that spirit comes. For God himself transfers himself into holy souls: and constitutes his prophets and friends powerful in deed and in word. Perceiving this, Paul [Marginal note: Paulus] said: I can do all things through him who strengthens me. For God is the soul to us, the whole virtue, without whom (as he himself declares) we can do nothing. Which Aristotle [Marginal note: Aristote.] also admits in his Meteorology: and at the end of his Ethics, saying that there is no virtue, whether natural or moral, except through God. And in more secret doctrines he asserts that a good and sound intellect can penetrate the secrets of nature: provided the influence of divine power is present, otherwise not at all. We receive this influence so much more copiously, the more we are freed from the burdensome impediments of the flesh, and of earthly occupations, and of ambition, and of the mind unduly agitated towards our neighbor, or towards any other thing: as we have not only from our doctrines, but also Mercury [Marginal note: Mercur. Cicero.] and Cicero attest. For he (Cicero) says in his On Divination: "Nor does the human soul ever divine, unless it is so freed that it has plainly nothing, or very little, to do with the body." But he (Mercury) says to Tatius: "Let them indeed despise both bodies and all corporeal things: and let them be carried to the one alone: if they wish to attain mind and God. For it is impossible, O son, to attend to both at once, mortal and divine things." For the more we abandon the animal and human life: the more we live as angels, or God: United with these, and restored to our proper and better lot, we can do all things, ruling over all. And this is the honor, in which man, when he was before sin, did not understand: but obeying concupiscence, he became like the senseless beasts: [Marginal note: Trisme.] and from a master (as Trismegistus says) he became a most wretched slave. Therefore, again carried up by virtue, and restored to his pristine dignity through his own victory, he acquires for himself that dominion, of which it is written.

--- Page 884 ---
TONE FOUR. 372

You have subjected all things under his feet. [Psalms. Genesis.] But this dominion is to be acquired in that order, which the supreme moderator established from the beginning, saying: Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion. Be fruitful, namely, in good works, and abound in much fruit: so that you may also fill the earthly body, through a certain superabundance, leading, namely, the animal man into servitude, and as far as possible into the nature of the spirit: and then you will have dominion over the fish of the sea, the birds of the sky, and the beasts of the earth: which indeed, since they inhabit three elements, also testify that other things are subject to human dominion. But so that we may ascend higher, by the birds of the heavens, all guests can be understood: by the fish, and beasts of the earth, all watery and earthly powers: under which even infernal ones are contained. Therefore, God being retained, and His grace preserved in us, and by filling the whole man with divinity through good works, and being restored to our pristine, and in us established, rank, we shall easily acquire dominion over all things: But let us come to particulars.

That a man of good heart/mind sometimes becomes a prophet by the manifold support of inferiors. Chapter III.

[E] Many times a man, presiding over himself, becomes a sharer of the divine mind so that future things may be foreknown: which is proper to God according to that of Isaiah: [Isaiah.] Declare to us what is to come, and we will say that you are gods. To which Peter assents, saying: [Peter.] For prophecy was not brought at any time by human will: but holy men of God spoke, inspired by the Holy Spirit. The Stoics also acknowledge this, whom Cicero follows in the first book of *On Divination*, [Stoics. Cicero] saying: That the foreknowledge of future things belongs only to the Gods: because there is no determined truth about contingent future events, by the pure judgment, namely, of mortals: to whom Ptolemy agrees, he says in *Fructus*: [Ptolemy.] Only those inspired by divine power predict particulars. However, Cratippus testifies that there have been many prophets, and many true foreknowledges (to omit our own), who, by Cicero's testimony, was considered equal to the greatest Peripatetics. Zeno also testifies, [Zeno.] and many who proceeded from him with the old academy. But before them Pythagoras, [Pythagoras. Certain omens] and the Stoics who followed these, likewise assert. For Calanus the Indian predicted the death of Alexander, and the Asiatic Magi predicted that Alexander himself, born, would be the ruin of Asia. Socrates divined that death was imminent for Crito on the third day, the priestess Diotima, a prophetic woman, predicted a plague. Anaximander announced an impending earthquake to the Lacedaemonians: and advised them to leave the city and their homes. Which entirely collapsed, and from Mount Taygetus, the outermost part was torn away like a ship's stern. Epimenides the Cretan, a divine man, [Epimenides.] warned by an oracle ten years before the Persian war, came to Athens: and performed certain sacrifices prescribed by the oracle: and to the Athenians fearing the Persian fleet, [Various Prophets.] he predicted that the Persians would not come for ten years, and after they came, they would depart having accomplished nothing. Why should I recount the prophecies of Cassandra, Helenus, Calchas, Amphia-

AAA iiij

--- Page 885 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTO**

Amphiaraus, Tiresias, Mopsus, Amphilochus, Polybius of Corinth, the Druids of Gaul, the Magi of Persia, the Chaldeans, and the prophets of Memphis, the Sibyls, and the oracles of others, this volume could by no means repeat, some of whom I have heard and proven to have predicted true things. But refraining from the memory of innumerable examples, let us see whence this prescience comes. For there is a certain kind of divination which is done by art and experience in various matters to be transacted. In the Athenian republic, Solon foresaw the rising tyranny long beforehand, and concerning Caesar, Cato with a prophetic mind said: [Marginal note: Solon Cato.] Beware of the ill-girt boy. And innumerable examples of this kind could be adduced. Also in domestic matters, many wise men have prophesied natural events. Pherecydes, the teacher of Pythagoras, when he had seen water drawn from a perennial well, predicted an earthquake was coming. [Marginal note: Phere. Thales.] Thales of Miletus, in order to convince his detractors and show what a philosopher could do, bought up all the olive trees in the Milesian territory before they flowered, perceiving by a learned conjecture of nature that there would be an abundance of oil. Which happened, and he brought back a profit of money, not for the sake of money, but to the envy of his detractors. Many doctors, farmers, and sailors, each by his own art and probable signs, foresee many things, which we disregard as being most well-known to everyone. And because no small things to be foreseen come from those who are in charge, which cannot be foreseen by prudence and art, therefore, consulting prophets or God was a most diligent concern for very many ancient Gentiles, Barbarians, Greeks, and Romans, but especially for the Hebrews. The Athenians always employed certain divine priests (whom they called Mantes) in public councils. [Marginal note: Athen.] The Lacedaemonians gave their kings an augur as an assessor, [Marginal note: Laced.] and wished him to participate in public council. The same people always consulted either the Delphic oracle, or Ammon, or Dodona concerning major matters. In difficult matters, the Roman senate ordered ten men [Marginal note: Roma. Hebræi.] to go to the Sibylline books. The kings of the Hebrews were accustomed to always employ their prophets, of whom very many flourished; and if they themselves were prophets, they consulted God Himself directly, as we often read concerning David. But these diviners were of many kinds. [Marginal note: Dauid] For there were Astronomers, who divined by the aspects of the heavens; Augurs, who observed birds, guided by the influence either of the heavens or of those who preside over them. Haruspices or extispices, who predicted the future by inspecting entrails. Pyromancers, [Marginal note: Aruspic. Pyromã. Hydro. Geomã.] who [divined] by fire; Hydromancers, by water. Geomancers, by points, or by the first cast [of lots/objects], or by a certain force drawn by the arm or hand, as the ancients were accustomed to do, from which they skillfully composed celestial figures, through which they divined. Necromancers, [Marginal note: Necrom.] however (who are also commonly called Magi), invoked unclean intelligences, from whom they might inquire about the outcomes of events. But these proceeded in two ways. For some, most impious (and in this age), submitting themselves to unclean intelligences, sacrifice, guilty of a double, most monstrous crime: because they commit idolatry, and because they show themselves viler than the vilest, debasing their own noble and excellent nature. Others, however, by a certain power, especially of divine names, invoke and compel them to reveal what they have received from the secrets of the Superior Moderators...

--- Page 886 ---
**TONVS QVARTVS. 373**

...received from the secrets of the Superior moderators. But both are often mistaken, because demons know nothing of future events, which are arranged by the supreme moderator: except insofar as it has been proclaimed and divulged in the celestial, nay, even outside the celestial court, before things are committed to effect. And by these (spirits) also sometimes are moved birds, and the entrails of animals, water, fire, hands for drawing points, and things of this kind. Sometimes also the human spirit is agitated by these evil spirits. And all these (diviners), either divine through stars revolved by angels, or through inferior instruments drawn by unclean spirits. There are also those who, following nature as their guide, prognosticate from the lines of men. For those who divine from the signs which God (according to Job) placed in the hands of men, so that each one may know his works thereby, are called Chiromancers. [Marginal note: Iob.] [Marginal note: Chirom.] But those who judge from the style and color of the face are called Physiognomists. [Marginal note: Physio.] For in the hands and face of men, as if in a certain book, some read, endowed with most sagacious intellect and learned experience, the events, characters, and deeds of men themselves. But more profound Theologians profess to read in the forehead all the beginnings, progressions, and ends of men. Which, even if it is true, is nevertheless found to be granted to very few. Therefore, to the multitude and the common people, Christ said: "Do not judge according to appearance." [Marginal note: CHRI STVS,] There are many other modes of divining, through inferior causes or signs: but all are reduced to the primary types described. But omitting these: let us see who are the true prophets.

**Who and whence a true prophet is made. Chapter IIII.**

[Large decorative initial E] TRULY, legitimate and true prophecy always (as we have said) proceeds from God and the favor of the superiors, and this is of many kinds. For sometimes it is effected through a dream: Sometimes through that vision which is between sleep and waking: And sometimes by frenzy and agitation of the spirit. All these modes converge in one type of divination, which the Hebrews call בת קול bat chol, that is, 'daughter of a voice,' which we call echo, that is, a reflection of a voice. [Marginal note: Hebræi.] For these are certain reflections of the divine and prophetic voice. But others divine through a clear vision, which a purified mind possesses. Others indeed, insofar as they receive from a living and true voice. All these kinds we see expressed in the sacred scriptures. For concerning dreams, Matthew says: "The angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, indicating indeed what he was to do concerning his wife and the child." [Marginal note: Matth.] Pharaoh also saw a dream, and Nebuchadnezzar: The former concerning the abundance and impending scarcity of food; the latter indeed concerning the most mysterious succession of kingdoms: And the former had Joseph, the latter Daniel, as a truthful interpreter of their visions, though they were by no means worthy to know the mysteries which had been shown to them, adorned as they were with royal lineage. [Marginal note: Ioseph. Pharao.] [Marginal note: Nabuc.] Concerning this sleep also Job speaks, saying: "In the horror of a nocturnal vision, or visions of the night, when deep sleep falls upon men, terror called me:" and the other things that follow, by which he teaches what kind of vision a dream is. [Marginal note: Iob.] But concerning that vision which occurs between sleep and waking, with senses neither asleep nor occupied, Ambrose speaks, saying of himself: "When the Lord-"

**AAA v.**

--- Page 887 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

[When the Lord] had granted me [grace], so that he might make me a participant of those fasting and praying, sleep so overcame me that I seemed neither clearly awake nor fully asleep: nevertheless, with open eyes, I saw two young men, ephebes, in very white garments, that is, clothed in a collobium and a pallium. For these were Gervasius and Prothasius, who suffered for the name of Christ, as a long account relates. The same happened to Lucian the priest when Gamaliel appeared to him, indicating concerning his own body, [the bodies] of his sons, and of the blessed Stephen the protomartyr. And although it is read in this writing which we have at hand that he was fully awake then, I believe that happened due to a fault of the scribes: since the order of vision thus requires that a vision should occur to one existing in bed, either sleeping or not fully awake. But if this happens to someone existing in full wakefulness, this occurs either in prayer or in some better disposition than that of one resting in bed, and of sleep about to cease immediately.
**[Marginal note: Lucy.]**

Prophecy, however, through frenzy, we read to have happened both to gentiles and to our divine prophets. Democritus asserts that some, in a frenzy, proclaimed those things which neither their nature nor art had taught. Indeed, he did not think anyone endowed with great genius unless they were stirred by a certain frenzy. Plato mentions Tymnicus of Chalcis, who had composed no poem worthy of memory; but sometimes seized by a certain frenzy, he composed a hymn to Apollo, the most beautiful of all, so that it might be conjectured to have been a divine rather than a human work. And in Phaedrus he teaches that the poetic doors are knocked upon in vain without frenzy. This frenzy the Greeks call *Mantia*, from Manto, the founder of Mantua; although *Mantis* is more often taken for every kind of inferior divination. Defining frenzy itself, he says: "Frenzy is abstraction, alienation, and connection." Abstraction, indeed, and alienation from those shadows and images by which bodily senses are excited and often deceived. Connection, because alienated from the animal man and adhering to divine powers, they receive many things from them which cannot be narrated by intellect and strength. Whence Dicaearchus the Peripatetic, when he treated of divination, approves of dream and frenzy. Nor does Aristotle disagree, as we gather from his Problems. I will omit most philosophers and poets who have taught many times about such things, and we will come to the sacred scriptures, which also treat of frenzy under the name of spirit:
**[Marginal note: Democ.]**
**[Marginal note: Plato]**
**[Marginal note: Tymnic.]**
**[Marginal note: Dicaearchus.]**
**[Marginal note: Aristotle.]**

as that which is read in the first book of Kings: "And the spirit of the Lord rushed upon Saul, and he prophesied in their midst, and changed into another man, he was numbered among the prophets, with the people marveling and exclaiming, 'Is Saul also among the prophets?'" This change, however, was from the spirit of the Lord seizing him, which is true frenzy sometimes seizing a man, even one subject to sins, with a legitimate cause intervening: as the Evangelist says concerning Caiaphas: "And he prophesied, being high priest that year." Thus many poets, filled either with love of study, or some virtue, or some good reason known to God, filled with frenzy, sometimes revealed hidden things and sometimes prophesied. Concerning which frenzy and sleep Cicero mentions in his book *On Divination*, saying: "There is another kind of divination in those who do not [divine] by reason, or by some conjecture from observed and noted signs: but by a certain stirring of the mind, or..."
**[Marginal note: First Book of Kings]**
**[Marginal note: Saul]**
**[Marginal note: John.]**
**[Marginal note: Cicero]**

--- Page 888 ---
**TONVS QVARTVS.** 374

they foresee future events with a free and unhindered movement. And this often happens to those dreaming, and sometimes to those prophesying through frenzy: as Bacchus to the Boeotians, Epimenides to the Coans, and the Erythraean Sibyl to the Trojans.
Marginal note: Bacchus
Marginal note: Epimen. Sibylla
But Cicero is mistaken about the Sibyl, because her type of divination agrees neither with dreaming nor with frenzy.
Marginal note: Cicero.
For there is a certain particular influx in them, about which it is not permitted to speak at present. Cicero continues: "For there is in the mind a premonition cast in from outside, and divinely enclosed.
Marginal note: Democt.
If this flares up more fiercely, it is called frenzy, when the mind, abstracted from the body, is stirred by divine frenzy, as Democritus and Plato assert."
Marginal note: Plato.
This frenzy is followed by a certain excess of the mind, and ecstasy, as Porphyry writes about Plotinus:
Marginal note: Plotinus Porphy.
"Who was often released from his body, and changed his countenance, whence he then discovered certain wonderful things, which he would write; Porphyry asserts that he himself was present at these miracles four times." But he himself (Porphyry) affirms that when he was in his sixty-eighth year of age, he was once seized by the divine power during contemplation.
Marginal note: Heracli.
But we read that Heraclitus and Democritus did the same many years before these,
Marginal note: Democt
who for that reason delighted in solitude. Of whom one was somewhat sad due to the intensity of his study; but the other, elevated above all lower things, laughed at everything,
Marginal note: Hippoc.
whence he was judged foolish by the Abderites (as Hippocrates writes). Seized by this ecstatic delight, Pythagoras and Zoroaster,
Marginal note: Pythag. Zoroa.
the former lay hidden for ten, the latter for twenty years.
Marginal note: Harmo.
The soul of Hermotimus of Clazomenae was accustomed to wander, leaving the body (as he said), though not abandoned by the body, as the truth of the matter is.
Marginal note: Semtoph Aristote.
Rabbi Shem Tov ben Falaquera also recalls Aristotle testifying in the book "On Bdellium" that his own soul, having shaken off sensible things, was elevated to the contemplation of the highest matters.
Marginal note: Diome.
We also read that Diomedes of Syracuse, intent on geometric figures, did not perceive the tumultuous destruction of his perishing homeland, nor the enemy imminent over his head. This happens either due to the excessive intensity of the contemplator, or due to the strenuous virtues of the person,
Marginal note: Cornel.
as Aulus Gellius wrote about the most chaste priest Cornelius,
Marginal note: Aul. Ge-
who, elevated in mind at Patavium, at the time when Caesar and Pompey were fighting in Thessaly, foresaw the time, order, and outcome of the battle.
Marginal note: Socrates. Plato.
Socrates (as Plato writes) stood from sunrise until the next sunrise, without food, without sensation, and without bodily movement, with mouth and eyes directed to the same spot, deep in thought, abstracted from his body.
Marginal note: Idem.
When Plato had frequently withdrawn far from his body with the intensity of contemplation, at last, in that very abstraction, he entirely departed from his bodily bonds.
Marginal note: Xenoc.
His disciple Xenocrates was abstracted from his body for a full hour each day. And what happened to philosophers by the most intense power of speculation, evangelical men and women achieved much more happily by the virtue of the Holy Spirit, most copiously diffused in many of them, and the more so, the more purified they were found to be.
Marginal note: Franci.
Francis (to begin with our own) was often suspended by such an excess of mind that, rapt out of himself and perceiving something beyond human sense, he was entirely unaware of what was happening around him externally. For passing through the town of the Holy Sepulchre, he was so collected within himself, indeed, so joined to God, that he neither saw the place, nor many things that were around him ex-

--- Page 889 ---
CANTICLE THREE

[Marginal note: Augusti.] ...nor was he aware of many things that those townspeople presented around him.
Augustine, when he was intent on meditation, did not perceive a woman who had approached him for consultation while she was speaking. Whence she departed unconsulted, somewhat indignant at the bishop, believing herself scorned by such a great man. But the next day, receiving a kind reply, she realized she had not been neglected but not perceived.
[Marginal note: Thomas Maria.] Thomas Aquinas (as it is said), intent on higher things, his mind,
[Marginal note: Magdal. Maria.] together with his body, was seen to be raised a cubit from the ground. Mary Magdalene, instructed and supported by the good Master, living in the solitude of Marseille, at fixed hou-
[Marginal note: Aegypt] rs, used to be lifted aloft by the ministry of angels. Whom followed that Mary of Egypt, purged of her former softness by the harshness of the desert, while praying, was seen to hang suspended a cubit's
[Marginal note: Clara.] height from the ground. Clare of Assisi, lying from the Lord's Supper until Resurrection Day, contemplating the trophy of the cross more deeply, when she returned, it seemed to her that not even an hour had passed. This I proved in another, similar in name and life, who, having received the sacrament at twilight of the same fifth day (Thursday), stood motionless on her knees until the Lord's Day (Sunday): on which, as if rising with Christ, she recounted many things to me that she had seen. We could adduce innumerable examples of this kind, both of Paul and of his successors, up to these our
[Marginal note: Paulus.] times, whom I either saw or knew by reliable report, seized by a frenzy, indeed by a holy divine power, led to a state where the human mind, relying on its own strength, cannot reach. But let us come to another kind of divination, which occurs through clear vision. Where man (as Proclus says), having feasted on truth, lives in pure splendor, according to
[Marginal note: Proculus] having entered into phantasms perfect on all sides, stable and pure, not indeed these drawn from the senses, but those better sacred things, which the prophets foresaw in the archetype, yet first purged by sacrifices, and by some peculiar gift of God, with virtues also intervening, which Plotinus, by an appropriate name, calls purga-
[Marginal note: Plotini.] tory. By these he teaches that we should shave, polish, and cleanse ourselves until each one has formed himself into a beautiful statue. A statue (I say) and an image, by which we perfectly reflect the most perfect Creator. For let each one be made (he says) beautiful and God-like, if only he is to behold divine beauty. For it is necessary that the beholder become like the beheld. And many things he pursues, all of which the highest Truth embraces in a single word, saying:
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. In which God all things are seen, all things are known, more or less, according as that vision requires a suitable disposition of the beholder. And these are the true seers, who learn what they foretell by seeing it in the mirror of that eternal light. Hence Scripture, according to custom, calls the oracles uttered by the prophets visions, when it says: The Vision of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, or of the other seers, and the prophets themselves were called seers. But since to Moses, more than to others, was exposed
[Marginal note: Moſes.] the fullest mirror of light, so much so that he was said to speak with God face to face, therefore sacred scripture places him before the other prophets: as we have in those words which Joshua (at the Lord's command) added at the end of Deuteronomy, saying: And
[Marginal note: Ioſue.] no prophet has arisen in Israel like Moses, whom the Lord knew face to

--- Page 890 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 375

face in all the signs and wonders which He sent to be done through him in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and all his servants, and before all Israel. There is a final kind of prophecy, which is brought about by an articulated and expressed voice, the most excellent of all. Hence John, who was called a voice, is also said by the highest Truth to be more than a prophet. [Marginal note: Ioan.] For this voice is first read to have been brought to Abraham by an angel crying from heaven, "Abraham, Abraham!" [Marginal note: Abrahā.] By which voice, both the liberation of his son and the blessing, which was poured out through his seed upon the whole human race, was announced. To Moses also, pasturing the flock on Mount Sinai, that divine voice thundered, saying: "Moses, Moses!" [Marginal note: Moses.] To him, when called, was immediately entrusted the task of freeing the people from Egypt, and of publishing the law, and committing the scripture. Moreover, a voice came to Samuel, calling twice and saying: "Samuel, Samuel," [Marginal note: Samuel] appointing him priest, and director and leader of the Israelite people. Nor do I think the mystery should be passed over, why the voice always called out to certain people by name twice. For wise men assert that this was done because the voice always raises him who is called to a higher rank: Therefore, the double voice indicates both the rank in which he was, and the rank to which he ascended when called. To this, therefore, come purified and good-hearted men, so that, having frequently become participants in the spirit of God and the holy divine power, they may prophesy, discern hidden things, and predict future events, which belongs to God alone, and to those with whom God has decided to communicate and make Himself familiar. Which He by no means grants, except to men who are well purified and composed.

An Apology for Prophecy. Chapter V.

[Large decorative initial E] ND although it is clear to all that there have been prophets and many prophecies, nevertheless, there are not lacking those who try to attack them: therefore, I judge it opportune to briefly refute their arguments. For they say (as Cicero gathers in the second book of *On Divination*): [Marginal note: Cicero] "To what does divination belong, to fortuitous or to fated things? Not to fortuitous things, because there can be no foreknowledge of those things which have no reason why they should be future. But what is chance, what is a fortuitous event, unless when something has fallen out thus, has happened thus, that it could either not fall out or fall out differently? How then can that which happens by chance, happens by blind chance and the fickleness of fortune, be foreseen and predicted? Nor does divination belong to fated things: because when they happen necessarily, foreknowledge of them profits nothing, indeed it torments, if a bad outcome is to occur. Nor can those things which are fated be guarded against. Nor indeed should it be said that all things will fall out more lightly if divine matters are attended to, because (as they say) since nothing is outside fate, nothing can be alleviated by divine intervention." They conclude therefore: "If nothing that happens by chance can be foreseen as future, because they cannot be certain, there will be no divination. But if they can be foreseen for that reason, because they are certain and fated, divination will profit nothing." Chrysippus, Diogenes, and Antipater add: [Marginal note: Chrysipp. Dioge. Antipa.] "If there are Gods, by whose auspices (as it is said) divination exists, why do they not openly explain what future things are to be guarded against, or embraced?" this especially when they are said to be gene-

--- Page 891 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

...beneficial and friendly to the human race, unless they think it makes no difference whether humans know or are ignorant of what is to come. And why do they hide so many and such great things from humans, so that what they know or foresee is nothing in comparison to what lies hidden? From this they seem to conclude that the Gods reveal nothing, but if anything is foreseen, it happens by skill, art, or chance. Some also attack the signs that seem to be given from heaven, relying especially on this reasoning: that winds, lightning, thunder, comets, earthquakes, vapors seen contending in the air, and such things, are natural, and not prognostication. A corroborating sign of this is lightning cast into the middle of the sea, or sent elsewhere in vain, and because those events which are said to follow comets and earthquakes do not always follow them. And many who pursue arguments against divination contrive in a greater manner, which indeed collapse utterly of themselves.

Nevertheless, we will respond to those things which have been brought forward. For [Marginal note: Cicero.] (to turn myself to Cicero and those who follow him) divination is of fortuitous and fatal things. And although fortuitous things seem to have no reason, yet there is reason in those to whom these things happen. For in the supreme moderator from whom they happen, [Marginal note: Aristo.] they are not without reason. For all fortuitous things are disposed by God according to His reason. But we (as Aristotle rightly thinks in *On Good and Bad Fortune*), since we do not see the cause of these things, which is God, attribute them to fortune, that is, to an unknown cause. Therefore these things do not happen beyond the intention of the supreme moderator, just as the iron of an axe falls into the water beyond the intention of the woodcutter. For it seemed by chance [Marginal note: Saul.] that the lot fell upon Saul when he was chosen as king, yet he had been indicated as king to Samuel by the Lord; and by Him who had indicated him, the lots were arranged to fall upon Saul, which, to those not understanding God's own disposition, seemed to have fallen by chance. So in many things it happens that they are judged fortuitous, which proceed from divine decree with supreme reason. And these in God are called divine provisions; which, if they are disposed through the heavens, assume the name of fatal things; but in those to whom they occur, they are judged fortuitous events. And prophecies of these are often sent beforehand, so that mortals may know that such things are foreseen and destined by God, whence they may dispose themselves to receive these influences well, and be grateful to the giver. Sometimes, however, things are disposed in such a series that their outcomes are in the disposition of the recipient, just as is the grace of one who works well, and manifold favor. Which are also promised under condition, as the supreme moderator often repeats in sacred scripture, saying: "If you hear me, if you do these or those things, I will be a generous rewarder." And although the supreme moderator knows what man will do, yet the vision does not pass into the past, so that from that vision, already had and elapsed, the matter may proceed with an infallible outcome. But how the same contingent event is infallible providence in God, and fate in the heavens (as Plato [Marginal note: Plato.] rightly thinks), that is utterly most difficult. And although we see and approve these things, yet no one has yet declared how they agree. Nevertheless, we can offer some example, by which we may be led to an explanation of this matter. A river flows by God's command ever-

--- Page 892 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 376

eternal and unfailing course passes through various regions: for the benefit of all inhabitants.
Someone takes care to receive the flow of water, by admitting as much as suffices him for irrigating his fields. Another, with fortified dikes, admits no water, for benefit or harm. Yet another, through his idleness, having built no dikes, allows all his lands to be flooded and all his crops to be destroyed. Thus, the course of the river is from God's providence and unchangeable command, or from the order of the heavens, or fate: but the benefit or harm is contingent upon the industry or idleness of the recipient. But if someone were to prophesy about that flood, perhaps one of the inhabitants would have better fortified his dikes to avoid harm, and another would have prepared himself to receive more abundant benefit. Behold then how that which is fatal is mitigated, but (to speak in our manner) that which comes from the infallible providence of God. To Chrysippus and his colleagues, however, we will say that the Gods, that is, Angels, by the command of the supreme moderator, reveal some things to us, as both the dignity of the Prince [Marginal note: CHRI] and our merits demand. And from these things declared by oracle, we can infer many other similar things, because God speaks once (says Job), namely in the same cause, to the limits of whose unique word, we may direct our actions in similar cases. [Marginal note: STVS.] And this is what the prophet Amos says: "The Lord will do nothing unless he reveals his secret to his servants the prophets," [Marginal note: Amos] either expressly, that is, or by analogy. But many things are hidden from the unworthy, just as much knowledge of things to be known by us [is hidden]. Nor is it fitting for a Prince to reveal his secrets to the common people, but to a few who are privy to his secrets, and these the most faithful: whose execution, however, is entrusted to the people in due time. And then all know those things which had been hidden among a few. And this is the order of things to be arranged, not indeed for harm, but for the benefit of the entire Commonwealth. But that they deny some celestial effects to be signs of future events, is groundless: since some effects are natural, and some happen by the immediate command of God. Those therefore which are natural, are not signs: but those which are commanded by God to terrify or punish peoples, such as those prodigies sent by Moses upon the Egyptians, and many similar things, can rightly be called signs, and are: from which man can conjecture the outcome of events. Therefore, the arguments brought forward do not so narrow [the scope] that a corner of truth to be evaded (as the arguers supposed) is closed off to us. Nor should anyone wonder if prognostications are obscure and require interpreters, since nothing, in a way, is accomplished in natural things without needing human aid. For gold and silver, and other metals, are dug up and excavated full of dross and mud, but are purified by human industry. The grape is born and ripens by the aid of nature: but it withers unless collected by human diligence and pressed into wine. Grains also, reaped with much labor, are threshed, ground, and often handled, before bread is made into food. Flax requires innumerable operations (so to speak), before cloth is woven for human use. And just as the works of nature are completed by art, so too are divine oracles offered to us for explanation: so that of nature, and of God

--- Page 893 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

having become co-workers, in both we may have the means to be exercised. But sometimes it is necessary to divine, so that we may understand what divine prophets have foreseen. Whence error often occurs, not indeed from a fault or defect of the prophecy, because what proceeds from the mouth of God does not become void: but it happens from the fault of a poor interpreter. Nor is prophecy therefore to be denied, because the interpreter is ignorant, or errs in interpreting: because medicine is not to be denied, although doctors are mistaken in many things. And farmers are mistaken, and ship captains, although they are considered good prognosticators from proven signs. Nor is prudence and reason lacking for governing the republic, although Gnaeus Pompey, Marcus Cato, Hannibal, and most prudent senators, and most illustrious leaders were sometimes deceived. So too it happens in the art of divination, which is brought about either by prudence, or by conjecture, or by the agitation of the spirit or by vision, that diviners are sometimes mistaken: either because what the spirit suggests, or the vision indicates, is not well perceived: or because some change occurs in that concerning which the prophecy was made: whence the oracle's sentence is either changed, if it was announced for harm: or if for good, it is delayed. [Marginal note: Jonah,] For Jonah, moved by a divine voice, announced to the Ninevites a future destruction on the fortieth day, yet this was delayed by the repentance of the Ninevites and the prayer of the prophet (as we said above). [Marginal note: Isaiah] Isaiah prognosticated that Hezekiah's death was imminent for the morrow: yet this was extended by royal weeping for fifteen years. [Marginal note: Moses.] Moses was chosen by God's oracle to lead the people from Egypt to the promised land: Indeed, he led the people out of Egypt: but erring at the rock, he by no means led them to the appointed place. [Marginal note: CHRIST.] Only Christ, free from error, uttered prophecy that could by no means be made void, who therefore said: Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.

Well-composed men draw all things to themselves. Chapter VI.

[Illuminated initial N depicting figures in a landscape] It has been proven by no small experience that well-tuned strings on stringed instruments, when one is struck, cause others to resonate. And it happens to oysters and all shellfish that they grow equally with the Moon, and equally decrease. Trees also in winter time are believed to age simultaneously with the Moon and Sun, and to shed their sap, whence they are thought to be opportunely cut. All things sprout and bloom in spring, and joyfully follow the course of the sun. Many such things also occur: in which the connection and correspondence of things is observed. Therefore, since man is the bond of all things, a well-composed man easily moves all things, and draws and leads them to himself: no less than a magnet draws iron, or rubbed amber draws straw. Hence He, who is the most perfect bond of all things [Marginal note: The Same] and rejoices in full harmony, said: 'When I am lifted up from the earth' – that is, most perfectly extended on the wood of the cross, and in harmony with all things that are in the length, width, height, and depth of this worldly machine – 'I will draw all things to myself, to dispose of all at will.' Whoever becomes more like Him, and is united with Him, obtains so much greater power of attraction, and therefore...

--- Page 894 ---
**FOURTH TONE. 377**

...and by that, it is further strengthened, reinforcing that power which is inherent in man by nature, of drawing from the correspondence he has with all things. This is inferred from the fact that while each animal has its own food – some hay or barley, some herbs, some legumes or seeds, some meats, and that kind – man alone, eating all foods, receives the growth and sustenance of life from all. Likewise, among living beings, some possess the earth, some the sea, some the air, and the more worthy ones, heaven. But man, using every element for his own benefit, draws pleasure and advantage from everywhere. Nor content with these, he strives to ascend into heaven, indeed into God Himself, so that there is no place he does not appropriate for his use; and deservedly so, that the saying of the highest Prince may be true: "Every place that your foot shall tread upon, shall be yours," [Marginal note: Deuter.] until, that is, you return to Me, bringing all things with you. And just as all things bring advantage to the man who is well-disposed with God, as Paul says: [Marginal note: Paul.] "All things work together for good to them that love God," so to him who is dissonant from God, all things turn to ruin, indeed, the son having become rebellious, to whom it is said: "Cursed is the ground in your labor." To the curse of this earth, which is the primary element and foundation of all corporeal things, follows the curse of all things which are made from it, or adhere to it. Hence, evil and dissonant demons lead away these rebels, concerning whom Porphyry says in [his work] 'On Good and Evil Demons': [Marginal note: Porphy.] "The bodies of the good consist in commensuration; but the bodies of the wicked are ill-proportioned; and with passive affection, they inhabit a place near the earth, indeed within the earth itself. There is no evil which they dare not commit. They have an altogether violent and unhealthy manner, being, that is, deserted by the guardianship of better demons." And therefore, they very much contrive and devise vehement and sudden ambushes. And while they make incursions, they are accustomed partly to lie hidden, and partly indeed to inflict violence. For this reason, the passions inflicted by them are sharp and swift. But cures and amendments become slower for better demons. And after he enumerated many evils which they commit, he adds: [Marginal note: The same] "For they are greatly delighted by all things thus wickedly and discordantly done." Therefore, those who live dissonant from God, from conscience, and from good spirits, having commerce with dissonant spirits, commit all things dissonant, disordered, and horrifying; so much so that, being dissonant with themselves, they agree with no one, but approve all things dissenting and disordered. But those who agree with themselves and with God, placed in their proper place, perceive all things corresponding to themselves and easily manageable; because (as Porphyry says in the same place) [Marginal note: The same.] every good thing is easy and equal in governance, because it proceeds from order, from which follows agreement, tranquility, and the easy consensus of all.

BBB

--- Page 895 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD
Men placed in their proper place, and well-ordered, easily dominate all things. Chapter VII.

[Large decorative initial C] It has been widely spread by famous report (as we have often said) that man, by the testimony of the sacred scriptures, was preferred and constituted over all the works of God's hands. Which doctrines Sulmonensis sings, imitating them: "An animal more sacred than these, and more capable of a lofty mind, was still lacking, and one that could dominate the rest; man was born." Nevertheless, we see most people, and almost the entire multitude of men, enslaved rather than dominating. We do not doubt that this has happened because man, rebellious against God (as Trismegistus says), having fallen from the contemplation of the Father and from His fellowship, whence he received the power of dominating, to the sphere of generation, has become the most miserable servant of all. And (with the highest truth as witness) sinful man is made a servant of sin, that is, of Satan leading to sin, or of concupiscence, which is the parent of sin itself. For concupiscence [Marginal note: James.] (says James) when it has conceived, gives birth to sin. Hence, everything resists man who has fallen from his dignity, nor do they deign to have him as master, who has now become such a vile slave. And they themselves refuse to obey him, until he is restored to his pristine honor, from which he had fallen, and becomes of one mind with God, from whom he may resume the power of dominating, just as he had already received it from the beginning. Then he will not fear poisons and [Marginal note: First Kings.] enemies, then he will not dread wild beasts: but he will shake them with terror, just as we read of David in the first book of Kings: who said to King Saul, who was terrifying him and recalling him from the encounter with the giant: "Your servant has pursued a lion and a bear, and I struck them, snatching the prey from their mouth. And when they rose up against me, I seized their chin and strangled them." Daniel killed a dragon, and stood intrepid among hungry lions. Paul shook off a viper clinging to his hand as if it were straw, fearing nothing of its bite or its harm, over which he had already obtained full dominion. For that power did not fail Paul, which He who [Marginal note: CHRIST.] said to the other Apostles: "Behold, I have given you power to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall harm you." John drank poison gladly and [Marginal note: Augustine.] steadfastly, and escaped unharmed from boiling oil. For (as Augustine, in my judgment, rightly determines in the third book *On Genesis According to the Letter*) animals were not produced venomous, hostile, and troublesome to the human race from the beginning: but after sin, they were constituted hostile and inimical. Which was brought forth from the Lord's sentence as punishment for the unjust rebellion of the first parents. For to the serpent, the most hostile of all animals to man (so that we may understand what was said thence to apply to other hostile animals), He said: "I will put enmities between you and the woman, and between your seed and her seed." And scarcely had the sentence been uttered, when, providing also for a remedy, He said: "It, namely the seed of the woman, shall crush your head: so that you may not be able to harm either it, or its true followers." Hence not only the Apostles, but also their successors prevailed against hostile animals. For Jerome brought a fierce lion, a most bitter enemy, into his own service. And many hermits

--- Page 896 ---
TONVS QVARTVS. 378
they stood in caves and caverns of the earth, fearing neither lions, nor bears,
nor serpents, nor the most powerful vexing demons. And what is more, the friends of God prevailed
against the fiercest natural force of the most impetuous fire. For three
boys in the Chaldean furnace, and Thomas in India, the force of fire, and Francis
extinguished the power of glowing iron. And to conclude with Paul (for time [Marginal note: Paul]
would fail in the telling) the saints through faith, that is, through faithful and firm adherence to God,
conquered kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped
the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, became strong in battle, put to flight the armies
of foreigners, and restored their dead to women, and from many infirmities
they caused to recover. By these wonders they seemed to have already obtained dominion over all
things, just as He obtained it, foreseen for the ancients, and now existing for posterity,
He who said: "In my name they shall cast out demons," and the other things that follow. [Marginal note: CHRIST]
For He Himself, by the power of His name, saved us, restored us to our pristine dignity,
and united us with Him who alone does great wonders: so that we also may do the same, [Marginal note: The same.]
just as the same restorer again says: "Whoever believes in me will do the works that I
do, and will do greater things than these."

Whence comes the power of dominion, how it was lost, and how it was restored.
Chapter VIII.

[Large decorative initial D] We have said long ago that the power of dominion was implanted in man by the supreme Creator.
But what it itself is, and how we possess it, I deem it necessary to examine.
Pliny examines this with subtle investigation, saying: "An elephant [Marginal note: Pliny]
meeting a man by chance in solitude, and simply wandering, is said to gently
and placidly even show the way. The same, noticing human footprints
before the man himself, is said to tremble with fear of ambush, to stop at the scent, to look around,
to snort with anger;" by these and other signs which the natural historian adds there,
man is feared most of all, but whence he is feared, we could not easily comprehend.
But lest we seem to assert the truth from only one rose (as they say), this

--- Page 897 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

and he said to Damus, who was eager to be taught. That is, from a certain active terror, instilled in man by the Creator, which the lower creatures perceiving, and all animals, fear and revere man himself.
[Marginal note: Hebrews.] The Hebrews, moreover, call this terror פחד *pachad*. And this (terror) is stronger in some, weaker in others. But it was greatest
[Marginal note: Isaac Jacob.] in Isaac: therefore Jacob, to whom his father had granted it by hereditary right, said to Laban the Aramean, his uncle and father-in-law: *“Unless the Lord God of my father Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had been with me, perhaps you would have sent me away naked.”* Where in Hebrew, instead of "fear," that *pachad* is found. And there again Jacob swore by the fear, that is, the *pachad*, of his father Isaac. For this is like a terrifying sign for whatever is subject to man: be it a servant or an animal: otherwise, neither would a boy rule oxen, horses, and elephants, nor would a king terrify the people of an entire region. Nor does man only have a sign by which he is feared, but another by which he is loved: in this too, he is made an image of God, who is encompassed by both tribunals, of love and of fear. In this way, he also becomes an imitator of Christ, of whom it was said: *“He shall reign in the house of Jacob, who, participating both in the benevolence of Abraham and in the terror of Isaac, possessed a tempered moderation.”* And with both these royal insignia, the first man was adorned.
[Marginal note: Adam] Hence, all animals are said to have been brought to him, as to their lord, so that he might give them all suitable names, by which he could call them at will. For they were subject to him by terror and attracted by his gentle mildness. And this lasted until he transgressed and lost his pristine dignity, and from being a lord, he became a most wretched servant. And the more sin is aggravated in man, the more he falls from that dignity, which instilled terror and attracted benevolence, into fear and servitude to others. Hence the first fratricide, who, adding homicide to the sin of his parent which he had contracted, felt himself cast down from that dignity, so much so that, fearing, he said to the Lord: *“Everyone who finds me will kill me.”* For he feared beasts or demons, not men, since the family of humankind was very small: his father, mother, wife, and sister-in-law, whom Lamech later took as his wife, who alone is said to have had two wives among those who lived before the flood. And because he raised up seed for Abel, which
[Marginal note: Cain.] Cain was bound to do, therefore he is said to have killed Cain, the despiser of the sign given by God, so that he might indeed raise up his brother's seed. Because he scorned to do this, he is rightly said to have been killed by Lamech, who raised it up, as a despiser of the law given specifically and later to be promulgated to the people. A great mystery lies hidden here, but let us proceed.
[Marginal note: Noah.] Noah succeeded, who was called righteous in his generations: therefore, let us see with how much favor he was restored to his pristine dignity. He builds an ark, into which all species of beasts, wild animals, and birds are brought by him, summoned, and they remain quietly under his command until the waters of the flood cease. As these (waters) recede, none yet presumes to leave the ark, except the raven and the dove, sent out by him not without mystery. But the raven (as is found in the literal truth) went forth and returned, until the waters were dried up from the earth. And not (as has been

--- Page 898 ---
TONE FOUR. 373

(as our faulty codices have it) went forth, and did not return. But the raven
returned empty, while the dove with an olive, a sign of peace. But whence such great
obedience of beasts towards man restored? Observe the words of scripture, and you will understand: For
to Noah his father Lamech prophesied, saying: This one will comfort us from the
works and labors of our hands in the land, which the Lord cursed:
For He purged it with the water of the flood, as a sign and sacrament of that water,
through which by the Messiah a true and full purification ought to be made. Him followed
Moses who called forth frogs, dog-flies, or lice, and flies, and very many
other things as a scourge for the Egyptians: But manna, water, quails,
a shadowing cloud, and a fiery pillar for food; and for the benefit of the people
entrusted to him. But with the arrival of the true restorer of the human race, Christ, of
whom Moses was a type, all things were again fully subjected to man: power having been given to the disciples
(as we recently said) to tread upon serpents and scorpions, and
over all the power of the enemy. Which dominion lasted so long in
believers, as long as faithful and perfect service to Christ persevered. But with the
arrival of the time, when the successors of Peter would lie, saying: "Silver
and gold we have none," they also lost the right to say "rise, and walk:" or
"rise, and minister to us:" Or "I command you in the name of JESUS of Nazareth, come
out of him:" and finally all power and dominion over the enemy's strength. Francis [Marginal note: Francis.]
however, having again embraced the Apostolic life, completely stripped of money and vices at the same time,
commands all creatures, and they obey him: He converted water into wine,
he passed through the fluid element with dry feet: He rendered a rabid wolf most gentle
and domestic: he imposed silence on chattering swallows with a single command:
He commands a falcon, and it becomes like an awakening rooster: he made
hares and rabbits domestic: he speaks to burning fire, and forgetting its own
power, it offers warmth to the man of God without horrible burning. He also performed
many wonders of this kind, restored to his pristine dignity. Nor is the hand of the
Lord shortened for all who show faithful obedience to Him. Nor indeed do all
who say, "Lord, Lord," or who outwardly bear the emblem of Christ, or of his
imitators, exhibit this, rather behaving like apes, than leading the true
life of Christ and the saints.

Various and wonderful condition of operating and dominating. Chapter IX.

ET although it is God alone's to perform miracles, nevertheless the human
race, the work of a most audacious nature (as Zoroaster says), and [Marginal note: Zoroa.]
audacious to perpetrate all things, especially with the favor of the ancient and powerful
serpent, who always tried to show himself as an ape of the supreme craftsman,
has undertaken many things, in which man appeared as an imitator of God and of nature.
Archytas of Tarentum (as it is said) made a fiery dove flying through the [Marginal note: Aegypt. Mercur.]
air. Which some of our time also boast of doing. The Egyptians (as Mercury
BBB iij

--- Page 899 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

[Marginal note: Albertus Magn.] relates) They constructed statues of the gods such that they would speak. And Albertus, surnamed the Great, is also said to have done this, namely, a speaking brazen head. And I found those who boasted that they could make moving and speaking bodies: yet they did not possess animal virtues, nor did they last long. To bring these about, they say they enlist the virtues of the heavens, observing certain aspects. But perhaps something else is the cause.

[Marginal note: Dædalus Roge. Bachom.] Daedalus is said to have flown with artificial wings. Which someone in our time has done for a short distance. Roger Bacon boasts of having done many things by pure and natural magic: namely, thunder in the air, clouds and rains, and very many transmutations of things. Some also have been found through art to be very sagacious imitators of nature: concerning which the Athenian, in Plato's tenth book of the Laws, says: "Art was given to mortals, by which they might generate certain posterior things, not indeed partakers of truth and divinity, but might produce certain images known to themselves." Some, not content with art, having become very accurate investigators of nature, studied how to bring about those things which were prepared by nature, applying active principles to passive ones, before the time ordained by nature itself: Whence they were commonly seen to perform miracles: which nevertheless are natural works, with only the anticipation of time intervening.

But those who [Marginal note: Magi.] used to perform these things were called by the Persian word "magi," that is, "wise men": although that name is by some abuse taken for a necromancer by many. For they were wise and knowledgeable of hidden things: among whom were those who, seeing the star at the birth of the Redeemer of the human race—beyond and contrary to the order of nature, which was very well known and familiar to them—concluded (as was right) that someone had been born who would transcend the order and limits of nature. Moved by this, they came from Persia and the regions of the East (that is, however, to the Bethlehemite city of Jerusalem) to adore the child, demonstrated by a wondrous and supernatural prodigy. For those who are called magi first studied medicine: so that they might know what was suitable for expelling cholera, what for phlegm, what for black bile: what for tempering the heart, liver, or stomach, and suchlike. And to do this better, they added astronomy, believing that infirmities, and the natures of herbs, roots, and other medicinal things, could be easily judged from the planets and stars with which they correspond, as we confirm Hermes did. And with him Zoroaster, Charundas, Ostanes, Zamolxis, the Brahmans, the Gymnosophists, and many among the ancients and later ones, whose fame (though they excelled) is obscure. But for many reasons to be passed over here (lest we digress more than is fitting), the knowledge of that natural order and the application of things has been lost. Whence some sought to adjure evil demons by divine names. Others, having become obscene and detestable, wished to consult them by adoring them, a crime indeed punishable by every penalty. But they consulted evil and unclean ones, because the pure and higher powers do not readily present themselves: but await purity of heart, sanctity of life, and the command of God. But the unclean ones readily present themselves, falsely favoring humans, so that by their cunning, leading their worshippers to what they desire, they forget God, nay, even think

--- Page 900 ---
VOLUME FOUR. 380

these evil demons, claiming divinity. From such, therefore, they are taught words for conjuring, and for summoning them at will to perform works, by which, appearing as gods, they may be worshipped by the common people. And because women have a greater affinity with demons and are more easily deceived, therefore they make themselves more accessible to women, who, by the art of demons, seem to do great things, as the Poet sings of Circe. [Marginal note: Virgil. Circe.]
With incantations Circe changed the companions of Ulysses,
And I have seen sown crops transferred elsewhere.
Which also Cicero, Pliny, and Seneca confirm. [Marginal note: Pliny Seneca.] Another Seer also sings of elements shaken, and the minds of men disturbed, and many killed not by potions, but by poisonous words.
The mind, polluted by no corruption of drunk poison,
Perishes, enchanted. Another Poet also (says). [Marginal note: Lucan. Ovid.]
Ceres, harmed by incantation, vanishes into barren grass,
The waters of the spring, harmed by incantation, fail.
Acorns from oaks, and grapes from vines, enchanted, fall;
And fruits flow with no one moving them.
And again he introduces Medea speaking of herself, [Marginal note: The same. Medea.]
When I wished, the rivers themselves, marveling at their banks,
Returned to their sources; I stop what is shaken,
And I shake what is standing with my song; I drive away cloudy seas,
And I bring in clouds; I move the uprooted oaks of the earth,
And the forests, and I command the mountains to tremble;
And the ground to roar; and the spirits of the dead to come out of their tombs;
You too, Moon, I draw down. And another (poet) relates that he saw similar things concerning a certain enchantress.
I saw her drawing stars from the sky; [Marginal note: Tibullus.]
She, by incantation, turns the course of a swift river.
She, by song, splits the ground; and draws forth the spirits of the dead from their tombs,
And calls down bones from the swift pyre.
When she wishes, she drives away clouds from the sad sky;
When she wishes, she calls forth summer snows with her voice.
Augustine also relates that, while in Italy, he helped certain women [Marginal note: Augustine.] so imbued with evil arts that on a given occasion they immediately transformed men into beasts of burden, which would carry what was necessary, and these, when the work was finished, they would again turn back into men. Which Apuleius confirms, [Marginal note: Apuleius.] who in a long narrative recounts that he, by the sorceries of a certain woman, while attempting to become a bird through magic, was transformed into a donkey. Which also in our times, by the testimony of many, happened to a certain person on the island of Cherso in Illyria, who for many years appeared to everyone as a donkey. Finally, having returned to himself, he narrated both the sorceries and the evil deeds on account of which this had happened to him, to a priest and a public preacher. And lest anyone should think these were delusions,
BBB iiij

--- Page 901 ---
**THIRD CANTO**

<br/>
**Daniel** Sacred writings tell (as we have in Daniel) that Nebuchadnezzar was changed into an ox, not by the enchantments of women,
**Nabuc.** but by the command of God to crush his pride, and that he ate hay for seven
**Regum.** years. Also in the first volume of Kings, we read that a Pythoness, a woman
**Samuel.** who was in Endor, had summoned Samuel the prophet; whom
**Saul.** Saul understood to be truly Samuel, having inquired from him about the outcomes of his affairs, who confirmed all that he had said before he departed from among men. And it was the true spirit of Samuel, easily to be summoned before a full year after his departure from the body,
**Hebræi.** as the Hebrews say, although most interpret the text in different senses.
**Exo.** Also in Exodus it is reported that Pharaoh's magicians had changed rods into serpents,
**Magi** that a multitude of frogs was brought forth, and that water was turned into blood, to the destruction of fish and the loss of the Egyptians. And if magicians, pythonesses, necromancers, sorcerers, and enchanters, and such like, had not truly existed, the oracle of the living God would not have commanded in many places that they be exterminated from the land. But there is a great difference among magicians, or those who work wonders. For there are those who work by ingenuity, art, and learning, supplementing, or accelerating, or augmenting the work of nature, if it is permissible.
**Zoroa.** If it is permissible (I say), because Zoroaster, the inventor of the magical art (as the writings of the Gentiles attest), says in his oracles: "Do not augment fate," that is, do not extend yourself more than what is given from above, or what the series of things demands,
**Gemi.** as his interpreter Gemistus Plethon writes. And these magicians are called wise men, or true philosophers. There are also those who attempt things that transcend human powers and knowledge. And these inquire about things they do not know and cannot do, and demand that they be done by unclean demons, sometimes submitting themselves and adoring them, guilty of a double crime, namely idolatry and the most vile subjection, especially to those (demons) to whom they themselves are by nature far superior. Others, however, adjuring by the power of divine names, compel the demons themselves. And these, although they do not commit the crime of idolatry and abasement, nevertheless expose themselves to manifest dangers, because even if the demons are compelled, they always watch to deceive the one who errs. Others, truly, not content with unclean demons, enlist better and pure intelligences, or God himself immediately, which is given to few or none.
**Moses.** For God spoke even to Moses, the greatest of all prophets, through angels,
**Paulus** as Paul says: "The law was given through angels by the hand of a mediator." But because the angel was acting in God's stead, therefore, speaking, he said: "I am Adonai," which is the four-letter name, appropriate only to God.
**Abrahā.** To Abraham also (as we read in Genesis) angels spoke, foretelling Sarah's conception and the burning of the Pentapolis, although Abraham, adoring the sender, said "Adonai" to the messengers, which name was more appropriate to the sender than to those sent. And what the angels did for those fathers, the power of Christ works for us, who (as we have said) drew all divine powers to himself, and who has a name to which every knee bows, and every name of celestial, terrestrial, and infernal beings. Hence it has been commanded to us that we do all things in that name. For in our time no other way of performing miracles has been left to us.

--- Page 902 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 381

What are natural works, and what are false, and what are true miracles, and what is legitimate power to rule. Chapter X.

[Decorative initial C] Since therefore (as we have said) some are content, as much as art, ingenuity, and our nature permits, to unite the world and apply active principles to passive ones, these are called wise men, true philosophers, or mages, exploring the secrets of nature and the symbols of things. Nor are these to be held worthy of censure or any injury, but of all veneration: whom the Lord of all wished to have as witnesses and supporters of His most blessed nativity. But when they consult evil demons, imploring their help to bring about things which neither art nor human ingenuity permits: then whatever things are accomplished by their favor, those are not miracles, but deceptions: because they happen either only according to appearance, or to the harm of those who undertake them, or who perform them. For asses appear, or horses, or any other animals, seen as transformed only by fascinated and deluded eyes. Hence that woman, who was judged a mare by the common people, to Hilarion she appeared a woman, as she was. Indeed, we confirm many obstacles brought about or removed by God, angels, and demons: for sometimes they disturb the eyes of those looking, and sometimes the medium through which they look. For demons stand (as we have learned by clear experience) before ten or twenty people, seen only by one or two, but not at all by others. And this is because they hide themselves at will, and present themselves as visible at will. Likewise, many will judge an ass, a lion, or a rooster, a goat, or a man to be present. But others see absolutely nothing: and this happens by the art and illusion of evil demons. But let us come to the heavenly beings. When Elisha was besieged by the army of the king of Syria surrounding Dothan, his servant feared, seeing chariots and horsemen around the city: To whom Elisha said: Do not fear, there are more with us than against us. And when he prayed to the Lord, that He would open the eyes of his servant, behold, he saw a mountain full of horses and chariots of fire around Elisha. Praying again against the enemies, that the faculty of seeing might be taken away from them, he was also immediately heard. Wherefore, just as the eyes of the boy were opened by his prayer, so the eyes of the enemies were closed, so that they could see nothing: and made blind, they were led by Elisha saying: This is not the way, nor the city: follow me, and I will show you the man whom you seek. And he led them into Samaria. When they had entered it, Elisha prayed again, saying: Open, O Lord, the eyes of these, that they may see. At his prayer, the Lord opened their eyes, and they saw that they were in Samaria. Which the holy man by no means sought to the harm of the Assyrians: but to the glory of his God. For when the king of Israel wished to strike them, he said: By no means: for you did not capture them with your sword: but set bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink, and go to their master. Behold how, at the prayer of the man of good accord, the visual faculty was increased beyond natural limits in the boy: and diminished in the Assyrians and again restored. But let us return whence we digressed. Therefore, some apparent miracles have been performed by soothsayers and illusionists, by whatever name they may be called,
BBB v.

--- Page 903 ---
CANTICI TERTII
THIRD CANTICLE

which are rightly called illusions. Some things were also done by the art of demons, either by transferring, as we have already said about harvests moved to other fields: or by applying active to passive [forces], just as when Pharaoh's magicians enchanted, frogs and flies were brought forth, made by demons by bringing about in a short time what would have required a long time to achieve: or by transmuting: just as they did, converting waters into blood. And concerning prophetic women transmuting many things, it has been said. But they neither confer any benefit, nor can they do things that are above nature. For frogs, flies, and blood were to the detriment of their Egyptians. But those things which are performed above nature, and for a benefit, are called true miracles. Moses therefore, by God's command, by bringing forth lice, for which there was no material to be approximated, performed a miracle. Moreover, by bringing forth water from the rock, manna
[Marginal note: David] from heaven, preserving the people from sickness, as the Psalmist sings: "And there was no one sick among their tribes." Also the preservation of garments, so that they were not worn out, and many such things were true miracles: Some of which, even if performed to the detriment, indeed as punishment for the unbelief of the Egyptians and their stubbornness, nevertheless redounded to the benefit of the liberated people. But the illusions of the Egyptians were for no one's benefit. Elijah and Elisha performed miracles, raising the dead, multiplying oil and flour, healing the sick, and such things. But above all, Christ performed miracles, commanding as the true Lord of all things: and always for benefit, but never for harm. And what his followers have done in his name has already been spread throughout the whole world by famous report, and we have touched upon it above. From this, indeed, it seemed that in those immediate, or close, disciples of his was the true kingdom of God, which he had promised to give: indeed, which he had given, when he said: "The kingdom of God is within you:" And again: "Behold, I have given you power over all hostile and resisting power, namely: For friendly power you will easily have at your beck and call."
[Marginal note: CHRIST] He, therefore, restored to us the lost kingdom: provided that, being well-tuned, we follow his footsteps with a straight and perfect pace.

A well-tuned person is heard in his desires, whatever he may ask for. Chapter XI.

[Marginal note: The same] There exists a saying of the Highest Truth. "Whatever you ask the Father, it will be done for you." But to whom this will be done must be considered, for he says. "Where two or three are gathered in my name, there I am in the midst of them," afterwards he adds: "Concerning whatever they agree upon, those namely who are gathered and have come together in my name, it will be done for them." A great, indeed, and very clear word. Gathering and agreement must precede for those who are about to obtain [something]. Agreement, indeed, is not only of two or three people: But (as Origen rightly understands) the concord of two is that of the animal man with the spiritual: but the concord of three is that of both of them with God. And this is that temperament which

--- Page 904 ---
TOMVS QVARTVS. 382

we seek out, indeed what God himself expects from all: if he is to receive pleasing and sweet prayers. For then man, like a well-tuned lyre, renders every voice and sound of his work pleasing and most sweet to God, so much so that He himself, resounding among them, provides strength and energy, so that prayers may be pleasing and effective to the paternal source of all good things, from whom all good things are drawn, and whatever is asked is obtained.

Here the prayer of Moses, or Moses praying, prevailed so much that he changed the divine sentence. [Marginal note: Moses.] And God saying, "Leave me alone, that my wrath may burn against them, and I may destroy them, and make you into a great nation:" Moses did not care about the promised exaltation, already in harmony and united with God, but about His glory, from which he prayed, saying: "Let not (I pray) your wrath burn against this people, lest the Egyptians say: 'He led them out cunningly, to kill them in the mountains, and to destroy them from the earth.' Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, your servants, to whom you swore by yourself, saying: 'I will multiply your seed like the stars of heaven, and all this land, of which I have spoken, I will give to your seed: and they shall possess it.'" Hence the Lord was appeased, hearing Moses praying, as a true, faithful, and well-attuned servant, who, zealous for the Lord's honor, put forward those things which the nations could bring to the Lord's injury, and brought up the oath already given, lest ill-wishers accuse Him of infidelity in His promise. And this one, so well-tuned with God, had such power with Him that he overcame Him, so that He could not punish the rebels against Moses' judgment and consent. Hence He said: "Leave me alone:" And what is wonderful, God came into Moses' judgment, lest He should disagree with him who was so well-tuned with Him.

Through Isaiah also He made known to Hezekiah the sentence already passed, that he should set his house in order, as he was soon to die. [Marginal note: Isaiah Hezekiah. GOD.] Hezekiah prayed and wept, so that the Lord immediately changed the sentence, and through the same prophet signified, saying: "I have seen your tears, and I have heard your prayer. Behold, I will add fifteen years to your days, and I will deliver you and this city from the hand of the king of the Assyrians: and I will protect it." Hezekiah prays for himself, and not only obtains for himself, but also for the city and the people to be delivered from the Assyrians. And by what virtue (I ask) was he supported, or by what reason strengthened? Certainly because he had felt himself well-tuned with God. Hence he said: "Remember (I pray) how I have walked before you in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done what is good in your eyes."

The Lord had delivered Drusiana, an Ephesian woman, to death, and her corpse was already being carried to the tomb. At the insistence of the supplicating people, John prays: and he calls her back to life again, deferring the sentence already pronounced, to another time, emulating his Master, who, recalling the lethal sentence of Lazarus, already stinking, prolonged the interrupted life for a longer period, with a prayer poured out to the Father.

Paul prays for those suffering the onslaught of the raging sea, and delivers them from imminent shipwreck, the Lord Himself granting them. Clement prayed, and the Lord opened a fountain of living water for all who were on the island to which they had been exiled with him. Catherine, seeing the torment of wheels prepared for her, with her eyes raised to heaven, silently prayed—

--- Page 905 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

...prayed, and that mass was shattered with a violent impact. This is because he was a faithful vicar of Christ, and she a most united bride. There are innumerable examples which prove that the prayers of the faithful, and of those well-tuned with God, are heard according to their wishes. But since all proof stands in the mouth of two or three, these few out of many suffice.

Only man, well-tuned with God, lives happily. Chapter XII.

**A**nd it is indeed wonderful that, while all seek to live happily, nevertheless very few attain it. This is because they seek outside themselves the happiness placed within themselves: For within us is the kingdom of God, within us is true joy and happiness, provided that we receive the guest, from whom comes all happiness and blessedness, according to what he says: "If anyone opens, I will enter and dine with him," that most happy and eternal supper, namely. Nor is there any other door through which we can enter except He himself, to whom we enter, and whom we receive coming into us through reciprocal love, and a man well-tuned, by which we not only converse with Him and He with us, but we are united with that joy, than which no greater can be expected.

And just as it is the greatest sorrow, and a pledge of Tartarean punishments, to disagree with oneself, and consequently with God: so true happiness is harmony with both.

But what sorrow there is for the discordant and impious, Trismegistus explains in "Clavis ad Latium," saying: "Impiety, my son, is the soul's gravest torment: For there is no flame of any fire more ardent than impiety: Nor does any fiercer beast so lacerate the body, as impiety, which is discord from God and oneself, lacerates the soul. Do you not see by how many evils the impious soul is oppressed? Alas, my son, thus cries out the wicked soul: 'I burn, I am consumed, I know not what to do, what to say. Evils flowing in from all sides devour me, wretched as I am.'" However, Proclus assigns the reason for these torments in "On the Soul and the Daemon," saying: "The wicked man cannot agree with himself, and, being at odds with himself, he cannot agree with others. Hence it is clear that from a disturbed imagination he is ignorant of many things, and, disagreeing with himself, he is tormented." Repentance, coming when disturbances are dismissed, declares this; in it, he blushes and is tormented by those things which, blinded by pleasure, he cannot recognize while committing them.

I will add that saying of Hierocles in "Pythagorean Verses": "Fools are afflicted on all sides by their vices and by the deprivation of divine affection." And because they refuse to adhere to the good, hence minds are carried towards evil affections in this life, as if into storms. In these matters, the heavenly oracle through Jeremiah makes us cautious with paternal love, while it says: "My people have committed two evils: They have forsaken Me, the fountain of living waters, and have dug for themselves broken cisterns that can hold no water." They have also changed their glory into an idol: For the glory, good, and happiness of man is to adhere to God. But he makes an idol who, neglecting God, worships himself or something viler, with great discord and disordered arrangement. And since tranquility arises from order, he who lacks order also lacks tranquili-

i
[Marginal note: CHRIST]
[Marginal note: Trism.]
[Marginal note: Proclus.]
[Marginal note: Hierocles.]
[Marginal note: Jeremiah.]

--- Page 906 ---
TONVS QVINTVS. 383

ty. Therefore, making an idol of himself, or of inferior things in inverted order, he dug for himself broken cisterns, which can hold no water of true delight. Therefore, man, restored to his glory and dignity, and returning to the fountain of living and truly refreshing water, from which he may always draw that from which he can rejoice, then lives joyful and happy.


On the harmony of the soul with its own spirit, and with other spirits
Fifth Tone.

[Decorative initial Q containing a seated figure] What spirit is. Chapter I.
How many kinds of spirit there are. Chapter II.
What spirit does in man beyond the soul. Chapter III.
What agreement man has with the spirit
of God. Chapter IV.
What commerce man has with the angelic spirit. Chapter V.
What man has with the diabolical spirit. Chapter VI.
How the spirit of one is understood to enter into the body of another. Chapter VII.
What harmony is derived between spirit and soul. Chapter VIII.

--- Page 907 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**
**WHAT SPIRIT IS. Chapter One.**

[Decorative initial C containing an illustration of a scholar at a desk] Since the entire evangelical law deals with perfecting man according to the spirit, always concerned with spiritual matters, it is therefore right and opportune that we should discuss something about the spirit: which is understood so variously in sacred scripture that it is comprehended with no small difficulty what it is. For it is among the most recondite things of nature, and nothing about it is to be discussed except what we can infer from sacred scripture, edited by the principal and chief spirit, or deduce from the characters of the word of that language in which all names were imposed on things according to their properties. For the Hebrews call spirit [Marginal note: Hebrews.] רוח Ruah. In this word there are three letters. One is ו (Vav), which is the letter of divinity, signifying the number six, according to which the supreme spirit itself, the artificer of all things, first brooding over the fertile waters, arranged (as was fitting) this whole machinery of the world. For the principle of all things is threefold, going forth into work, adorning, and cherishing, and each of these through an intermediate spirit, from which the number six results in the greatest unity. Hence the most recondite theo [Marginal note: Theologians of the Hebrews.] logians of the Hebrews said that letter of divinity, which is ו (Vav), signifying beginning and end—since it is the end of numbers and the beginning of tens—has six barbs: because in that respect, in which God himself is the principle, signified by that letter, it is a ternary: from whom, in whom, and through whom are all things. But in that respect in which it is director, cherisher, and restorer, it rejoices in another ternary, namely a spiritual one: not because [Marginal note: Abraham.] there are three spirits of God (although Abraham in the book of formation says spirit from spirit) but because its operation is threefold, according to which the royal prophet in the [Marginal note: David] fiftieth psalm calls it the principal spirit, the right spirit, and the holy spirit. Therefore, in that word and name, there is the letter of divinity, which is ו (Vav). There is also another letter of life, which is ח (Chet). For life is called חי (chai). The third is ר (Resh), which signifies two hundreds, and matter, or a certain corporeality: For the bi [Marginal note: Jerome.] nary (number two) signifies matter, hence (according to Jerome) it is always inauspicious, unless joined with another number it is made fortunate: For the material, when associated with life and divinity, [Marginal note: Canticle.] is fortunate. For the two hundreds signified by ר (Resh) are those about whom it is spoken in the Canticles. Where, after א (Aleph), and one, and a thousand are attributed to divinity, it is added: "And two hundred to those who guard its fruits:" For we are placed as guardians in the vineyard of the Lord with a binary corporeality. Where if we guard the fruitful precepts of the Lord: finally we shall be united with Aleph itself, prepared for all truly peaceful things, and with Him who has peace in Himself. The spirit, therefore, is a certain bond, binding and connecting two extremes together: itself vivifying and strengthening, according to the condition of the uniting spirit. Hence it partakes of the nature of the two extremes which are united, and of its own connecting middle, as is hinted at by the letters of its name already explained. For it vivifies since it contains life within itself, whence it is sometimes called the spirit of life. Cor-

--- Page 908 ---
TONE FIVE. 384

but it strengthens, giving power to operate, according to that of the Apostle: To be strengthened by his spirit. [Marginal note: Paul.] And concerning Samson it is read in the book of Judges: The spirit of the Lord rushed upon Samson, [Marginal note: Samson] and he tore the lion apart. And whatever strength proceeds in a living being comes from the spirit of life, which is in it: But the spirit of man is a certain bond, and a medium partaking of intellectual and corporeal nature, binding and connecting the animal and coarser soul with the intellectual faculty, which is called the higher part. Indeed, the spirit is corporeal, yet not having a gross, tangible, or visible body, according to that of the highest truth: Feel and see, for a spirit does not have flesh and bones. [Marginal note: CHRIST.] But that body is most subtle, and easily unifiable with the higher mind, and with that divine [part] which is in us. Hence, those who become divine are called spiritual by a common and ordinary name, because their endeavor is to lead the body into the nature of the spirit tending towards the divine. Or because they strive to be led back into God Himself through the spirit of God: Hence it is clearly inferred that the spirit differs from the supreme soul, which is called intellect, mind, light, and the higher part: and also differs from the animal [soul], from which the Apostle teaches to separate by the power of the word of God, saying: For the word of God is living [Marginal note: Paul] and effective, and sharper than any two-edged sword, reaching even to the division of soul and spirit. For the word of God teaches that we remove all rational affection, which pertains to the spirit, from concupiscence and animal pleasure: and lead it back into God through that supreme and divine [part] which is in us by the grace of God: with which the spirit ought to be united not only by affection, but in reality itself. Nor can it be entirely united with the higher [part], unless it is separated from the lower [part]: just as fire proceeding from wood is not united with the higher and ethereal fire, unless it is separated from the coarser subject. But that which is separated, is also distinguished. And if they say that the spirit is the rational soul, we indeed grant it: For it is a certain medium (as it pleases Plotinus and the Academics) [Marginal note: Plotin. Academ.] between the lower animal [part] and the divine, which is higher, connecting both, and unifiable with both. But lest readers be offended, while they hear that the soul is something corporeal, we say that it has, or partakes of, something of corporeality, while it is in the body, and uses the body, as a necessary instrument for itself. But if it is entirely separated from the body, it is united with that higher divine [part], indeed with God Himself, with all corporeality entirely removed: finally drawing with itself the body, which is glorified, of which it was the immediate form. And since the soul itself is the medium leading the body into a better state, it is necessary that it partakes of the nature of both. And this is as much as we can say about our spirit at present.

How many kinds of spirit there are. Chapter II.

[Illuminated initial E] AND because spirits are found not only in man, but also in other things: therefore let us explain the various natures of spirits. For there is a natural spirit, celestial, demonic, human, angelic, and divine. The natural spirit is both in the greater world and in the lesser world that medium by which one member operates upon another. In man there is the power of imagi-

--- Page 909 ---
THIRD CANTICLE

...native, or fantastic, power in the head, so that it moves the hand or foot, and it is immediately moved: although it is quite distant from the head, where that cogitative power is. How this happens is through multiple spirits, which are between the head and the hand or foot. Concerning these natural, or vital, spirits, authors of medicine discuss much: which we leave to be read in their books. For through them the soul is united with the flesh and body, whence it lives: and through the body itself, by means of those spirits, the soul operates.

In the same way, there is a manifold spirit in this lower mundane body: through which one thing operates on another: just as a magnet on iron, attracting it: and multiple stones on humans, gladdening, strengthening, and inducing multiple dispositions: and whatever operates on another, not only by means of primary qualities intervening, but from a (as they say) hidden virtue. Since this is a medium, so that one thing operates on another, it can rightly be called a spirit.

There is also a celestial spirit, by means of which lower things are bound with the heavens: so that from them, through that spirit, they may draw and receive celestial influences. There is also an evil demonic spirit, and a good angelic spirit, both given to every human. Whose office it is to seek union with our spirit, so that each may call forth and draw it to themselves. But the evil one strives to render those who are similar and united to himself through evil works: as the highest Truth testifies concerning the traitor, saying:
[CHRIST.] "I have chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil," that is, turned into a diabolical spirit through his iniquity, and united with it and made the same: For these spirits are mixed together like water and wine, or two wines, or two waters together. But the good one, through good works and those symbolic of himself, strives to lead us into angels: as God testifies concerning John in
[Malachi.] Malachi: "Behold (he says) I send my angel before your face."

Finally, there is the divine spirit, which by sacred and true doctors is called the bond, binding namely our soul with God himself, first made one with that spirit,
[Paul.] according to that Apostolic saying: "He who is joined to the Lord becomes one spirit with him." And this is the consummated union, which finally we hope to attain. And because all things must finally be reduced to their principle, from which they proceeded: because all things are through Him, from whom all things emanated (as
[The Same.] the Apostle teaches) therefore that spirit, by whom brooding over the waters all things were brought into light, is required, so that by the same they may also be reduced to that from which they came forth. Hence concerning Him it is said: "The Spirit of the Lord has filled the whole world": And again. "And the spirit of his mouth, all their power":
[Wisdom.] For by Him not only the heavens, but this entire universal machine is sustained, lives, is strengthened, strives, and finally is reduced to where all things tend. But this divine spirit is entirely absolved from all corporeality, and is like a consuming fire, melting, converting, and leading those whom it touches into its own nature, and making them divine. And until it completely deifies them, it always flows into them, and pervades them, being a fire and a channel through which it flows.

--- Page 910 ---
**FIFTH TONE.** [Page number:] **385**
**What the spirit does in man beyond the soul. Chapter III.**

<span style="font-size: 200%; line-height: 0.5; vertical-align: -0.2em; display: inline-block;">V</span>erum if we wish to follow the Peripatetic dogma, from which we have that man is composed solely of soul and body, it will be difficult to explain what the spirit is, and what it does in man beyond the soul, since both are considered by them to be the same. If, however, we listen to the Platonists and the Hebrews, [Marginal notes: Platon. Hebræi Plotinus Paulus] who distinguish those things and place more in man, we will easily write down what the spirit is, and what it does: for Plotinus places three things in man: the supreme, the lowest, and the middle. The supreme is that divine (part), which our (authors) call the superior portion. The lowest is what Paul calls the animal man. The middle is the soul, or the spirit connecting both. All Hebrews call these three: נפש רוח נשמה nephes ruah nessamah. [Marginal note: Hebræi] Which we, interpreted, call the soul, the spirit, and a certain divine (part), for which we have no more suitable word than the superior portion: or as we have translated in Genesis, the breath, [Marginal note: Genesis] breathed into us by God, namely, or by His spirit. Which, united with the lower soul through our spirit, the whole is called by the common word, נפש nephes, that is, soul. Therefore, that middle (part) is what Plotinus calls the rational (part), [Marginal note: Plotinus] and the Hebrews call the spirit, but our (authors) call the soul, from the mixture it has with it. That supreme (part) also always prays for the best, never sinning, but murmuring against sin and error. The lowest (part) is always immersed in evil and concupiscence, according to what the apostle says: [Marginal note: Paulus] "I see another law in my members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin: so that I do not do the good that I want, but the evil that I do not want." But the middle spirit, which is also called the rational soul by Plotinus, [Marginal note: Plotinus] can adhere to either at will. But adhering to the superior (part), it merits (reward); and adhering to the inferior (part), it turns itself away from God. But that superior (part), since it never assents to sin, never sins at all; therefore it is neither damned but departs unharmed from its punishable companions, just as when a window is closed, the sunlight departs, leaving the space dark: thus, with that light departing, the soul and spirit remain, to be cast into inner darkness, [Marginal note: CHRISTVS] to which outer darkness will be added, according to that testimony of the Supreme Truth concerning the damned: "Go into outer darkness." And because man performs a twofold work through that superior (part): namely, he understands God, and merits (reward) by doing good: hence, with that (part) departing, he can neither understand God nor merit anything. Therefore, he becomes impenitent, never to return to God. But the middle soul, which I believe to be the same as the spirit, either consents to that superior (part), and merits (reward), and is finally united with it, and made happy: or consents to the inferior (part) drawing towards evil, and agitated by an evil demon, and then merits badly (i.e., punishment): and is so depraved that it becomes the same as the evil demon itself. Therefore, the spirit differs from the power of the superior and inferior soul, though capable of being united with both at will: but proceeding on the proper path, it must be separated from the inferior, and united with the superior.

**CCC**

--- Page 911 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

**What covenant man has with the Spirit of God. Chapter 4.**

[Large historiated initial S] But since we have said that the spirit is a medium connecting both extremes, hence it partakes of the nature of both. Therefore the Spirit of God, through which man is united with God, partakes of the divine nature: indeed, it is God himself. It also has a very great connection with that divine [part] which is in man. Hence the disciples were better taught by the Holy Spirit, as if by a nearer person, and having a clearer connection with man, than by him who
[Marginal note: CHRIST] said: "I have many things to tell you, but you cannot bear them now, with me, namely, teaching." But when that spirit of truth comes, he will suggest all things to you, and will teach you all things, as if more familiar to you. Whence not without cause Ste
[Marginal note: Stephen, Apostle] phen, the apostles, and others are said rather to be filled with the Holy Spirit than with the Son of God. This because the spirit is more capable of being united with us than the Word: whence not even that [Word] was united with man without the spirit, with the oracle speaking to the virgin

--- Page 912 ---
**FIFTH TONE. 386**

And daily acquires another guardian for himself, as he ascends from virtue to virtue, until he reaches the clear vision of God in the supernal mirror. And to indicate that there are not one, but many guardians of man, the Prophet says: God has given his angels charge over you, to guard you in all your ways. [Marginal note: David.] Which has a place not only in Christ, but in any human being (as Jerome rightly believes). [Marginal note: Jerome.] Nor are there only intermediate spirits, who lead to higher ones, but also the supreme ones themselves who lead to God. Hence John, in his most famous vision, calls those supreme intelligences, which hold the primary place in the divine tribunal, spirits, saying: And from the seven spirits who are before the throne of God. [Marginal note: John.] Through one of whom was made the announcement of the divine word to be united with man, just as through them we are immediately led back to God.

**What man has with the diabolical spirit. Chapter VI.**

[Large decorative initial H] Man (as Mercury testifies), consisting of all powers, has commerce with all: from intellect with the supernal and good; from matter with the infernal and evil. [Marginal note: Mercury.] Hence Michael, prince of good spirits, [Marginal note: Michael.] is said to have dominion over all souls already expiated and to be received by God; and the evil demon, the ancient serpent Azazel, or As

--- Page 913 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE.**

had proclaimed before, was saying: "Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight his paths." Nor is a dwelling less to be prepared than a way, and both must be arranged with rectitude, since the guest who is to dwell there is supreme truth and rectitude. But the evil demon, being by nature false and crooked, procures that things be arranged for himself with error and falsehood. Nor is the dwelling of our heart ever left empty: for when one guest departs, another immediately enters, as it is said of Saul [Marginal note: Saul.] in the first book of Kings: "The spirit of the Lord had departed from Saul, and an evil spirit tormented him, sent by the Lord, as the order of things required." As it is also held in the Gospel, which is titled "according to Luke," [Marginal note: Lucas.] concerning that man possessed by an unclean spirit, which, having been expelled, the world entered. The expelled one, returning here to re-enter, cannot do so until, through the uncleanness brought in by seven more evil [Marginal note: Paulus.] spirits, the good guest is put to flight: Once he is put to flight, the evil ones entered. For neither God, angel, nor demon dwells in anyone, or does anything with him, except through spiritual power. Hence Paul, after remembering many things which God bestows and works with us, adds: "But all these are produced by one and the same Spirit." Which, however, is sometimes (as we touched upon above) called the Spirit of the Father, according to that saying of the Savior: [Marginal note: CHRI- STVS] "But the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you." Sometimes it is called the Spirit [Marginal note: Paulus. Act. apo.] of the Son, concerning which the apostle says, addressing the Galatians: "God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts." Sometimes it is spirit from spirit: as we read in the Acts of the Apostles: "All were filled with the Holy Spirit:" Which, however, did not depart from its dignity and deity: but by a certain spiritual power sanctified and deified the spirit of the apostles whom it had infused.

What harmony is to be established between spirit and soul. Chapter VIII.

**T**herefore, in order that a good spirit, whether angelic or divine, may be introduced into us, a harmony must be established between spirit and soul, not indeed that [soul] which is the same as spirit, but with a better one. From which harmony it may at last come to union with it, and as a medium may draw down with itself that which is inferior, transmuted into spirit, to a better lot. For just as in the art of transmutation (as the more secret [Marginal note: Philoso] philosophers say) there is a medium, as it were a certain spirit clothed, and first imbibing the nature of gold, afterwards by a certain immense and very swift force draws other metals into gold. And because the spirit of man is transmutable into diverse natures, hence the Chaldeans said that man is an animal of a dissolutory nature, having no determined [Marginal note: Chaldei.] image, but very many adventitious and extraneous ones. For the spirit is transmuted not only into a superior and inferior nature, which are in man, but into a demon, an angel, and God, as we have touched upon. And when transmuted into a better lot, it draws down the inferior with itself, it refines this by itself, just as gold is refined when drawn through a very narrow opening: so that it may be drawn out like a silken or linen thread at will, and from animal become spiritual. Hence not without mystery רוח, which is spirit, with letters inverted, by 'sirup' in the manner of the Cabala

--- Page 914 ---
SIXTH TONE. 387

mystically renders `חור hur`, which signifies a hole, through which passing, the
animal body becomes spiritual, so that, united with the higher, it may be beatified.
And this happens when the spirit is first united with that divine, and higher [part].
But if, falling, it is glued to the lower [part], then through it, as through the
holes of a sieve, it distills, and whatever can be corrupted from the higher [part]
is lost. If therefore man desires to become divine, it is necessary that his spirit
agree with that divine [part] which is in him, into which he may finally lead back
the lower soul, first having been made spiritual. But we make the spirit consonant
with that divine [part], when, obedient, it adheres to that which is called synderesis,
always murmuring against evil, and imploring for good. Consenting to which, and
in no way disagreeing, there follows in man peace, and tranquility, and thence
joy of heart, jubilation of mind, and the pledge of blessedness: so that he may
say with the prophet: *But for me, to cling to God is good.* [Marginal note: David.] There also follows
an expansion of the heart, and an eager course, and a very swift flight towards good:
so that he may again say with the same prophet: *I have run the way of your commandments, when* [Marginal note: The same.]
*you enlarged my heart.*

Concerning the most sweet agreement of man with God, so that he may begin to enjoy Him here. Sixth Tone.

**H**
Man by nature emulates God. Cap. I.
Man images the archetype in form. Cap. II.
The body no less agrees with God clothed, than pure and stripped matter (as we have said) responds to Him naked and most simple. Cap. III.
Since in man there are the lowest, and the highest, and the intermediate, all things are easily reconciled with God through man himself. Cap. IIII.
Why the soul is placed in the body as if in a melting pot to be purified. Cap. V.
Why God placed here a mutable soul and mind. Cap. VI.
How man differs from God by sin. Cap. VII.
Just as man falls away from God and differs by sin: so through penance he is led back, and tempered. Cap. VIII.
By the sacraments man is rendered more perfect in himself, and more resonant with God. Cap. IX.
He is expiated by sacrifices. Cap. X.
He is cleansed by alms. Cap. XI.
He resonates with virtues. Cap. XII.
By reading he imbibes whence he can modulate. Cap. XIII.
He preludes by meditation. Cap. XIIII.
He modulates by prayer. Cap. XV.
He is introduced by contemplation. Cap. XVI.
He is united by love. Cap. XVII.
He is transmuted by ecstasy and excess. Cap. XVIII.

302

--- Page 915 ---
**CANTICLE THE THIRD**
**MAN BY NATURE EMULATES GOD.**
**Chapter One.**

[Large decorative initial P] OUR purpose being to explain in what way man agrees with God and is assimilated to Him, as we are persuaded and invited in many places, we have deemed it opportune to repeat with what image of Himself the supreme Creator produced man. For it is already a commonplace to everyone that man was made in the image of God and brought to His likeness. But in what this image consists (with due respect to those who have written about this), since it has not yet been clearly explained, let us investigate. For it is said by common and old-wives' doctrine that the three divine persons are represented in the three powers of the soul: memory, intellect, and will. Nor indeed can this be called an image, whose role is to represent the whole and the complete likeness, as is most excellently determined by our more perspicacious theologians. But it is the role of a trace (vestige) to represent not the full image, but some aspect or part of it. And although the whole divinity is comprehended in the three persons, and also in the very nature of deity, yet more things can be explained in God which man most fully represents in other parts than in the aforesaid three powers. Hence, some more acute among the newer theologians, not content with that simple assigned reason of the image, say that it consists not only in those three powers, or (to speak in their manner) in primary acts only, but also in secondary ones. For there is in us intellect, memory, and will: and these same three represent in God. Moreover, there is a word produced by our intellect, and love emanating from the will, by the former of which the divine Word, and by the latter the Holy Spirit, who is a certain love, is signified. But the intellect, having a present object and producing, portrays the Father. But this image in man falls short of the portrayed God no less than a painted image of a man falls short of the true man himself. For the word produced in us, and likewise love, which are called secondary acts by them, are accidents in us; but in God they are substance, and identical with God Himself. And memory, which in us is the recollection of past things, in God is the most complete intuition of all past, present, and future things. But we can still hunt for a more expressive image of God in man, comparing to God not only the soul, but the whole man, in whom shines forth every kind of image of God Himself. Therefore, God is full life, vivifying all members of the mundane body. There is also in the soul a certain fount of life, emanating from the supreme and divine sea, and bestowing life upon all members of its own body according to their condition. Hence it is said in the sacred page: "And He breathed into his nostrils the breath, or soul, of lives," so that it may provide life to the body.
[Marginal note: Scotists]

--- Page 916 ---
TONVS SEXTVS. 388

vegetative, sensitive, rational, intellectual, and divine. God is [marginal note: Salom.] by His power containing all things; and of man, the Wise Man says in his discourse: God made man dust from the earth, and gave him the power of containing all things. God knew all things. Man also can know all knowable things, since for an adequate object (as theologians and philosophers say) he has truth, [marginal note: Theolo. Philoso.] or being in common; but the image differs from that which is imaged: He understands all things by a single act, but man by a certain succession. Moreover, God is a certain circle, drawing origin from nowhere else than from Himself, and tending towards Himself, He leads all things thither with Him. Man is also a circle proceeding from God, and tending towards Him: leading all things thither since he contains all things. Nor does he ever rest until he reaches God Himself, from whom he proceeded. He also emulates God Himself as far as he can in duration. But since he cannot have the entire possession of his duration at once, he endures at least by perpetual succession; and he is so similar and (so to speak) connatural with God, that at last he is united with Him: as we shall declare in its proper place, God favoring. Finally, God is free from passions, except insofar as He suffered in the assumed body: no passion indeed passing to God Himself; just as He does not undergo passion when (as Jeremiah says) filling heaven and earth, He is altered in the members of the mundane body which He fills. [marginal note: Ieremię.] In which sense perhaps not foolishly can be understood all those sayings by which God is said to be angry, to repent, to grieve, to desire, and the like. For He does not repent: except insofar as it appears in the members, or things, which He fills: from which, when He withdraws Himself and turns away His face, all things are disturbed: and empty of the vivifying God, they return to their dust: so that those members, indeed God in them, seem to grieve, to be sad, and to be indignant, and to repent: that is, ceasing from His accustomed influence. But when His spirit returns, which fills the whole orb of the earth, all things are recreated and seem to rejoice. Nor does our soul behave differently, concerning which Aristotle and Plotinus say, [marginal note: Aristote. Plotin.] whoever says the soul grieves or rejoices: he said it weaves or spins. Therefore the soul does not rejoice or grieve: just as it neither weaves nor spins: except insofar as it is joined to the body. For it is characteristic of the animal (as Plotinus follows) to suffer and to act, but not of the rational soul, nor of the intellect: but it is the role of these to direct the animal which acts: just as it is God's role to moderate the world, whose members are secondary causes operating with such agitations and passions. Nor is any disposition found in man, but that something of divinity shines forth in it, nor is there anything in God that is not represented in man: but let us come to the figure.

CCC iiij

--- Page 917 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**
**Man portrays the archetype in figure. Chapter II.**

[Large decorative initial S] If, however, man is to contain the true image, it is necessary that he possess a figure similar to it. But alas, where do we enter? What figure shall we assign to Him who is enclosed by no boundaries, figured by no lines, painted with no colors? Hence, with such diligence, it is provided by divine law that no image whatsoever should be made, neither of God Himself, nor of any heavenly things: lest visible creatures be adored through those idols: and also lest that which cannot be depicted be falsely expressed. But even if no figure can be derived, nor any found in lower things, in which the likeness or image of God may be recognized: nevertheless, supported by the testimony of God, in man we shall seek out His likeness and figure, at least through a certain analogy, by which indeed the supreme artificer Himself deigned to ascribe it to Himself, just like all the divisions and members of the human body.

For He said He has a right hand, as
[Marginal note: David] is sung in the Davidic psalm: The Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand. He also has a left hand, to which the wicked to be condemned will be placed at the last judgment. He is also said to sit sometimes like a man, as it says in Isaiah:
[Marginal note: Isaiah] Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. He is also said to walk in Genesis towards midday, or the coming of the Day. And concerning His eternal journeys, the Psalmist says: They have seen your goings, O God, the
[Marginal note: David] goings of my God and my King who is in the sanctuary. Which steps and journeys sometimes cause terror: so that by them (as Habakkuk testifies) the mountains
[Marginal notes: Habakkuk. Jerome.] of the age are crushed, and the hills of the world are bowed down: because (as Jerome rightly explains) when He comes to us, He destroyed demonic powers: and reduced the heights of the age to nothing.

Concerning the members also ascribed to God Himself, sacred scripture is the most abundant witness. For He has eyes and ears: concerning which in the Davidic
[Marginal note: David.] hymn: The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and His ears are open to their prayers. Eyelids: concerning which in another psalm. His eyes look upon the poor: and His eyelids examine the children of men. There are nostrils: with which (as is often repeated in the law) He smelled sacrifices as a sweet savor. There is a mouth: concerning which in Isaiah
[Marginal note: Isaiah.] it says: You have not questioned my mouth. There is taste and a throat: concerning which in the Canticles:
[Marginal note: Canticles] Your throat is like the best wine. Concerning the head also it is said there: Your head is like Chermel, not indeed that great mountain in the maritime regions of Syria (as very many even Hebrews are deceived), but like a worm which produces purple. For Chermel signifies both, both mountain and worm. And that the comparison is made to a worm, and not to a mountain, is indicated by the words that follow: And the hair of your
[Marginal note: Psalm] head is like royal purple. He also has hands: concerning which the royal prophet says: Your hands, O Lord, made me and fashioned me. Fingers: concerning which he sings again: I will see your heavens: the works of your fingers. Teeth: as it is said in the Canticles:
[Marginal note: Canticles.] It is worthy wine for my beloved to drink, and food for lips, and teeth—

--- Page 918 ---
TONE SIX. 389

with his teeth for chewing. There are shoulders: concerning which Isaiah says: [Marginal note: Isaias.] The government is upon his shoulders. By which also (as it is said in the Gospel) he carried the lost sheep. His arms also are wondrous, with Isaiah saying: To whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed? For with an outstretched arm (as is often repeated in scripture) he led the people out of Egypt, with the greatest signs and wonders following. Heart: according to what is said in the first book of Kings, [Marginal note: Reg. i.] that David was found [by God]. Breast: from which the sleeping disciple drank the streams of the Gospel. Back: concerning which in Jeremiah: I will show them the back and not the face in the day of their destruction. [Marginal note: Ieremie.] And the royal prophet in a hymn, The back parts of his back in the paleness of gold. [Marginal note: Dauid.] Feet: [Marginal note: Dauid.] concerning which the same prophet in another song: And darkness under his feet. Wings, and flight: concerning which in the same song: He flew upon the wings of the winds. And in another hymn it says, that the heavenly king had wings of a dove covered with silver: which the prophet himself elsewhere longed for, saying: Who will give me wings like a dove? And sometimes the Creator shows himself to us clothed in various garments, not indeed so that his covered members, like our fleshly ones, might be protected from cold: and be veiled for decency: but these are those garments, in which, and through which, we can know God: whom we cannot apprehend in his naked and pure essence. Therefore, the members are manifold powers in that one most simple [being]: and the garments are a certain way, through which he walks with us: or diffuses himself in us, while through the members, that is, through his manifold powers as far as we are concerned, but unique in himself, he accomplishes something. About these garments, the Hebrews discuss most extensively in their theology: The fringe of which, when touched by the woman with a hemorrhage, JESUS cried out saying: Who touched me? For I also knew that power had gone out from me. For through these garments (as the Hebrews themselves teach) all virtue emanating from him proceeds: for from a naked God (as they say), that is, completely removed from all relation, nothing flows: although he exists as the fount of all goodness. For in that which flows forth, it takes on a certain relation, which they call a garment. But the members (as we have said) are certain powers. For the eyes signify his clearest gaze: to whom all things are naked. The sense of smell [signifies] a discerning power, and one receptive to the scent of good works. The ears [signify] that by which he perceives and understands all things, even to the thoughts of the heart: which God alone knows. The eyelids [signify] the hidden and subtle judgments of God (says Jerome) [Marginal note: Hieron.] by which he examines all hidden things. With his teeth he bestows upon us manifold food, finely ground: and he receives our works as food to be ground for our increase and progress, just as the Son of God said concerning the converted Samaritans: that they had become food which he had to eat, least known to the apostles. [Marginal note: CHRI- STVS.] With his shoulders he carries all things, and they are peculiar to the Son of God according to that [saying] of the apostle: [Marginal note: Paulus.] Upholding all things by the word of his power, upon which he also placed the sheep to be carried, and the burdens of all our sins, and the weight of dominion, and of the scepter, [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] and of judgment: as he himself testifies, saying: All judgment the Father has given to me. The arm is power, by which he has often accomplished, and accomplishes, all wondrous things.

CCC v

--- Page 919 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

With His heart, He loves us most tenderly. With His breast, He receives us, and embracing us most dearly, He cherishes us. His back: which sometimes turning, He shows Himself indignant; and sometimes shining in created things, He offers Himself to us for contemplation, just as He said to Moses, "you shall see my back parts." With the feet of His affections, He sometimes comes to us; and sometimes, our sins demanding it, He departs. With wings, He flies most swiftly, so that He may meet our needs; which we ought to desire, so that we too may be able to fly to Him. Behold then how God has shown Himself similar to us in all things; indeed, making us, He has rendered us conformable to Himself in members and figure, if there is any in Him. For it is, but not confined by any limits, nor circumscribed by lines; but it is the fountainhead and origin of all properties and figures. Which members (as we have said) He puts on better garments than ours are clothed with. Concerning these super-mundane garments, we shall examine something (with sacred scripture as our guide); yet not indeed with an arrogant, but with a fitting law, by which it is said:
"Flee, and far from here, you wretches, go far away, you profane ones."

A body is no less fitting for God clothed than for Him naked, pure and unadorned matter. Chapter III.

[Large decorative initial E] We have already explained above how harmoniously matter, the purest potentiality first created, corresponds to God, the purest act, and the first cause of all things. Now is to be explained that correspondence which man, the most perfect work of God and the most renowned of the entire mundane machine, has with God Himself, now clothed with all perfections, which are internal or external (as they say). Nor should this unusual mode of speaking about the garments of God among our theologians terrify anyone, since we have from sacred scripture, the mother and fount of all theologians, most ample attestations concerning these very garments. David sings in the ninety-second psalm: "The Lord has reigned, He is clothed with beauty; the Lord is clothed with strength, and has girded Himself with power." [Marginal note: David] Moreover, the theologians of the Hebrews enumerate up to ten garments, not without mystery. I would not believe them, unless that same sacred scripture taught me. For they assert God to be naked when He Himself (blessed be His name) is considered in His solitary nature, entirely removed from every relation (as they say) arriving intrinsically and extrinsically; and as He is supremely "this." Who, as He is understood thus remote, speaks in Isaiah, saying, "אני יהוה הוא שמי Ani adonai hu semi." [Marginal note: Isaiah.] Which we have interpreted as: "I am the Lord, this is my name," but it would be better said: "That very thing, namely, which is my name." For that "hu" (הוא) is not something relative referring, but a word importing that very thing which is supremely "this." Who, as such, communicates Himself to no one, therefore it follows: "My glory, which I have in my supreme unity, I will not give to another." He, therefore, supremely "this," before He diffused Himself into creatures, begot the Son, with whom He simultaneously produced the Holy Spirit. When therefore He decided to generate the Son,

--- Page 920 ---
**SIXTH TONE. 390**

he put on the first garment: which by our (theologians) is called paternity. But there is a certain inaccessible light, according to which he is called by James the Father of lights. Concerning which garment [marginal note: Dauid.] the Psalmist sings: Clothed with light as with a garment. But receiving in his paternal bosom the son whom he begot, he put on another garment, concerning which the prophet sings in the same psalm: You who cover its upper parts, or its heights, with waters. For what is this height if not he, concerning whom Paul (says): Made higher than the heavens? [marginal note: Paulus.] Or what is the higher and sublime (thing) of God, if not he concerning whom the same apostle (says): God appointed his son above every principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and above every name that is named, not only in this age, but also in the future: and subjected all things under his feet: and gave him as head over all the church? Therefore, with this one thus begotten, who exists as his supreme work, and as true supramundane water having the generative power of all things: according to which it was said: Let the waters bring forth creeping things of living soul: And again: All things were made through the Word: Then God is said to be clothed with waters: in whom the Father and the Son are the same. In which divinity the Son, who is the wisdom of God, put on the property of water: so that the wise one rightly says: And the water of saving wisdom gave him drink. [marginal note: Sapien.] Which waters he not only took for himself as a garment, but that he might pour them out into us, not only to quench thirst, as he cried out in the temple saying: [marginal note: CHRISTVS,] If anyone thirsts, let him come to me and drink: but also for abundant satisfaction, as speaking with the Samaritan woman he said: If anyone drinks of the water that I will give him, it will become in him a spring of water gushing up to eternal life. For he was not speaking of this elementary water, but of that superexcellent (water): in which the Son of God came, that he might wash us from defilement: and offer us the cup of that water of saving wisdom. Which Son of God is also said to be clothed with a royal garment. On his garment (says he who was privy to divine secrets) it was written on his thigh: King of kings, and Lord of lords. But the Holy Spirit, proceeding from both, appeared fiery in both laws, and clothed with fire: For the whole Mount Sinai smoked (as we read in Exodus) when the Lord descended upon it in fire: And again it is said: Now the appearance of the glory of the Lord was like a burning fire on the top of the mountain, in the sight of the children of Israel. Therefore that Spirit, by whose power the fiery law was given to the ancient fathers, also appeared to the apostles in fiery tongues, comforting them, and igniting them to explain that law which the Son of God came to fulfill: And concerning which Moses, singing in his last song, says: And in his right hand was a fiery law. [marginal note: Moses.] But after that most sacred, and intrinsic, and perfect production, the supreme good itself willed to diffuse itself into creatures: whence it took (as they say) seven other garments, with which it might act and converse with us. The first of these is called the magnitude of mercy, clemency, goodness, and piety, by which it diffuses itself into others: and most piously governs them, and most clemently anticipates, justifies, and rewards them: concerning which it is said in the Apocalypse: [marginal note: Ioan.] And it was given to him, namely the Lamb, and to his bride the Church, whom mercy espoused, that he might cover

--- Page 921 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

...itself with shining and white fine linen. For fine linen are the justifications of the saints, which are communicated to us through God's grace and clemency (through Christ). Therefore, by imparting good things to us with this garment, He is clothed as it were with a certain fine linen. And because immense clemency and piety are tempered by the balance of justice, He therefore assumes another garment of justice: which is sometimes called bloody, sometimes linen [Marginal note: The same.] in scripture. For He was clothed (says John) with a garment sprinkled with blood, and His name was called the Word of God: that Word indeed through which all things were made and restored: To whom human nature, united, shed blood to appease divine justice, which demands blood where sin has been contracted through flesh and blood. Admiring this garment, the angels (as it pleases Dionysius) said: "Why is your garment red, like those who tread in the winepress?" In Daniel, however, Gabriel, who announced Christ to be immediately conceived by the virgin, and sometimes (not without mystery) bears His person, was seen clothed in linen, a sacrament perhaps to be declared elsewhere. And since He is the supreme beauty, making all things beautiful, especially human nature, to which He imparts His complete image: Hence He assumes another garment, which in many places of sacred scripture, especially in the Davidic hymns, is called הוד תפארת (hod tipheret). Which we have interpreted sometimes as adornment, sometimes as beauty, sometimes as magnificence: But it is properly the name of divine glory and beauty: Communicating this in many ways in us, He says in Ezekiel: [Marginal note: Ezek.] "And I clothed you with embroidered garments, and with fine linen, and with richly woven cloth:" and concluding many things that are commemorated there: "I gave these to you, that you might be perfect in adornment and beauty." [Marginal note: Cant.] Hence it is said in the Canticles: "Human creature, most beautiful of women," that is, of all creatures.

After these, the supreme ruler was clothed with two other garments: by which He may show Himself more familiar to us: Through which many charisms flow down upon us. Concerning these garments, it is sung in a Davidic ode: [Marginal note: David] "You have put on confession, or renown, and adornment:" because, namely, through them God makes men renowned and adorned. Which garments are sometimes called breasts, which indeed nourish prophets, and nourish anyone familiar with God, just as it is said in the Canticles: "I will give you my breasts." Which is also sometimes called the third heaven: [Marginal note: Paul] to which Paul was carried up. And because the Creator Himself also grants us life, the foundation, and stability of every good work, hence He is called life, the tree of life, and the land of the living; In which land He also offers Himself to us clothed: as the divine Psalmist sings: [Marginal note: David CHRIST] "The deep, like a garment, is His covering:" of that land indeed, not indeed of this corruptible one, which will pass away together with the material heaven, as the supreme truth says: But of that which is never changed, concerning which the prophet continues: "It shall not be moved forever and ever." Finally, this supreme divine majesty assumes the last garment: by which He may show Himself entirely familiar to us. And this the Hebrews call מלכות (malcut), that is, kingdom: because by it He rules us intimately. It is also called שכינה (shekinah), that is, dwelling-

--- Page 922 ---
TONE SIX. 391

...the immediate dwelling of God in us: according to which Jeremiah said: But you, O Lord, are in us. [Marginal note: Jeremiah]
And thus He who dwelt with His people in the figurative tent of testimony: now dwells with us in a tabernacle not made by hand: that is, not of this creation (as the Apostle teaches). [Marginal note: Paul]
Dwelling in us, moreover, like a cloud, He defends us from the heat of divine wrath: and covers our nakedness and ignominy, lest we be confounded by the sight of His glory. And concerning this garment, it speaks in Ezekiel, [Marginal note: Ezekiel]
saying: I spread my cloak over you: and covered your ignominy:
and at length, it continues with a long discourse on the garments by which He covers our baseness: and by which, being adorned, we may be found honorable in the heavenly nuptials. Therefore God clothed Himself, so that He might interact with creation: and give to man His perfect image: And so that He might clothe this man with divinity, He Himself put on humanity, and this passible body. In which body, the soul existing with that divine light, or mind, or intellect, man has (as some wise men assert) a more express image of God than an angel: because this organic body with its members and its particles is that garment, through which all the garments of God are represented.
Hence God (as we recently touched upon) is said to have a head, eyes, ears, and all the members that are in the human body: Which for one reason are called members: for another reason, garments: and for yet another, they are called measures: by which God Himself measures and moderates all things: but especially man to His perfect goal.

Since in man there are the lowest, the highest, and the intermediate, all things are easily reconciled with God through man himself. Chapter IV.

**T**here exists in man another most express image of God: And this is: because man contains in act all things that God contains in power: and through a certain eminence, as Dionysius teaches. [Marginal note: Dionysius]
Thus He also gave to man the power of containing all things. Whence every creature is named by the Savior (Gregory interpreting), as we have already explained in the first volume. Therefore, man being reconciled to God, all things are reconciled to Him: just as in the assumed humanity, all things are consequently said to be assumed: The soul first, and the spirit, and all animal powers, the power of vegetation, and the elements, even to the matter from which the human body was fashioned: and finally all things that are contained within it. Nor do we believe that this was done only in man, and in that particular nature assumed by the Word, but that the same happens in all who become guests of Him who said: We will come to him, and make our dwelling with him:
And in all for whom that most heartfelt prayer was heard, [Marginal note: CHRIST]
which the Son, at His departure from us, offered to the Father, saying: I pray, Father, that as I and You are one, so also these may be one in You. For this is the end of man, as we shall presently say: And the end towards which all things tend: For all things tend towards God: to whom at last they are led back through man.

--- Page 923 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

Why the soul has been placed in the body, as if in a melting pot, to be purified before it returns to Him from whom it came. Chapter 5.

[Large initial S] But before the soul returns to this unity with God, it is enclosed in the body, so that it may perfect it: and may be perfected by it. And I do not know whether it perfects first, or rather is perfected, or whether both happen simultaneously. And perhaps both are perfected simultaneously in those who proceed well and rightly. The soul is (say our Peripatetics and theologians) in the body as a form perfecting the body itself: not indeed giving only movement, and the power of sensing, vegetating, and understanding: but perfecting and purifying it: so that it may be able to be transformed into a better state. Nor does it dispose the body to be transmuted, unless it itself has been purified. For not all of us will be transmuted (says the apostle) although all of us will rise again. But only the bodies of those will be transmuted whose souls are found purified. The soul, therefore, has been placed in this body as in a melting pot, to be melted down and purified by the fire of charity, and by the divine [fire] poured throughout the whole person by the grace of the infuser, and according to the disposition of the recipient, with sacrifices and sacraments especially intervening. Hence, that supreme sacrifice having been offered, to which all other things assist and yield, by the high priest JESUS, redeemer of the human race, that fiery Spirit was sent, for melting, purifying, and forging the hearts of the disciples, and of those who were to believe through them. Nor did any space of time intervene after that supreme sacrifice had been offered, except fifty days: a number indeed suitable for sending that fiery spirit. And He would not have been sent, unless the Son of God had been offered as a sacrifice, He himself testifying, who says: Unless I depart, offered, that is, to the Father as a burnt offering, the Paraclete will not come to you. And this sacrifice was indeed often prefigured in the old law: And that when, a sacrifice having been offered, fire was expected from heaven, which, coming, and the sacrifice already kindled and changed into fire, would lead it back with great mystery to the sublime place from which it had come: and would pour that fire upon the offerers, about which it is said in Deuteronomy: God is a devouring fire, or one who eats and consumes. For just as one eating consumes food, and changes its substance into himself: so God, accepting the true sacrifice of one offering it duly, is nourished both by the sacrifice and by the offerer, transforming both into Himself. But the true sacrifice, which we ought to offer together with the sacrifice offered by the high priest Christ Jesus, is that each person, according to apostolic teaching, offer himself as a living, immaculate, holy, God-pleasing victim with rational service. And thus not only souls will ascend into God Himself: but also the mortal and corruptible body, putting on (as the same apostle says) incorruption and immortality: And then it will be a true burnt offering, that is, consumed by that divine fire which transmutes all things. But the Hebrews [call] this sacrifice עולה hola, that is, ascending

[Marginal note: Paulus.]
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
[Marginal note: Deuter.]
[Marginal note: Paulus]

--- Page 924 ---
TONE SIXTH. 391
they call it: because the whole sacrifice, burnt and already changed into fire, ascended before God: So too our animal body, sown, nourished by divine fire, will rise and ascend spiritual along with the soul, perfected by it, and both by God, who is the true burning fire, melting, and transforming.

Why God placed the soul and a changeable mind here. Chapter VI.

[Decorative initial E] And since the soul is in this melting pot for the purpose of being purified and perfected, some, even lesser ones, whose constant endeavor is to strike down their superiors with their own judgments and words, wonder why God sent the soul here, not only changeable, but also to be continuously assailed by a most bitter enemy. And as if constituting themselves as God's counselors with impudent rashness, these bats dare to accuse the highest light and highest wisdom. But let dust and ashes blush even to name Him: whose beautiful form shines from the rising of the sun to its setting. And if (from the monument of the wise) young people ought to be silent in the midst of great and old men: what are we in the sight of the Ancient of Days, and of Him in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge? Nevertheless, we can, not to accuse: But to be enlightened, ask: why the wisest creator did not make man stable, and continuously proceeding on a straight path. Here Anselm answers: because [Marginal note: Ansel:] he could not. But (to speak better) it was not fitting to make another God: who alone is by nature impeccable and immutable. Alexander attempts to adduce reasons for this saying: [Marginal note: Alex:] Which John Scotus decided to support as weak, yielding however [Marginal note: Ioan. Sc.] more to the opinions of the saints than to his own reasons. Therefore, leaving these as invalid by the judgment of their own author, to be read in his books, we will confess with Augustine to Volusian, [Marginal note: Augusti.] that God can do many things which we are unable to understand, since the whole reason for the deed is the power of the doer: which is infinite, and transcends all human and angelic intellect. Therefore, for the discussion of this matter (as the Lord shall enlighten our eyes) we will say something, presupposing what the order of things requires: which (as Aristotle also teaches) [Marginal note: Aristo.] is twofold in every army, namely, of the soldiers among themselves, and of all of them to the leader and head: if they agree with him, all things are done correctly: but if they disagree, they become discordant and confused. But just as all soldiers can defect from an emperor, however good: so all creatures can defect from God: for there are many distracting objects for us, by which we are carried now to the highest, now to the mediocre, now to the lowest. Now too we are distracted from an inferior good, now from an apparent one, now (as they say) from a predetermined one: And by these continuous games we are deluded: until our heart, always restless, always unstable, is established in the Prince: who alone is stable: whence if we are sometimes made stable: this is not of nature (says Augustine) [Marginal note: Augusti.] but by the grace of Him whose it is to establish all things. How fittingly, however, it has been done, that man has been placed in the field of struggle with a two-edged battle, Gre- [Marginal note: Grego.]

--- Page 925 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

Gregory, inspired by the divine spirit, declares: "In the toils of scourges and the struggles of vices, not only does our weakness become known to us, but we also learn how much we advance in virtue. Indeed, no one knows his strengths in peace. For if battles are lacking, the trials of virtues will not profit. He is an improvident soldier who boasts himself strong in peace: For no one knows how much he has progressed, unless [Marginal note: Firmianus.] amidst adversities and uncertainties." To whom Firmianus assents, saying: "Above all, God willed there to be diversity in us, and did not reveal the mystery to the common people, but revealed it to very few. This diversity, however, contains every secret of the world. For this makes virtue, without which one could not only not exist, but not even desire it: because virtue cannot exist unless there is some adversary, in overcoming whom it may either exercise or display its power. For just as victory cannot exist without struggle, so neither can virtue without an enemy. Therefore, when He gave virtue to man, He established an enemy for him on the contrary, lest virtue, languishing in idleness, should lose its nature. The reason for this is that being assailed and undermined, it may be strengthened. Nor could it otherwise reach the highest peak, unless, always stirred by an assailing hand, it should establish itself in the zeal of fighting for its own salvation: For the Lord did not wish that that blessedness and reward be attained by an easy path. Therefore, being about to give virtue, He also gave an enemy, who would inject desires and vices into the minds of men, and hold them in uncertainty, existing as the author of evils and the contriver of all errors: so that while He calls man to life, that one, on the contrary, may seize and lead him to death. Hence our path is left doubtful, the battle uncertain, and very many misfortunes. For that enemy leads astray or deceives those who strive for truth. Or if he cannot by deceit and cunning, he assumes a manly spirit, with which he tries to undermine the vigor of the exalted, contriving things obscene to speak of and execrable, he harasses and kills: And yet, as he overthrows many, so by many he is conquered and overthrown, he departs: For great is the power of man, great his reason, and great his mystery." Origen also, in his 'On First Principles', pursues this matter, saying: "For if God had granted that we could in no way be overcome, what cause for struggle would remain for him who cannot be overcome? Or what merit of the palm, where the reason and faculty of resisting and conquering are not admitted? Therefore, those things are sufficiently good for him which are adverse to him, which, when he has overcome them, become a cause of greater glory for him. For Job received double after the victory over the enemy, who had received power to fight against him. Nor indeed is a crown owed to us, unless a struggle precedes it. For what glory and what praise belongs to the crowned one, unless he has earned it by some race or battle? For this is the condition of earning, that he may prevail from that point whence he could have been shipwrecked. And it is the praise of victory that he conquers from that point whence he [Marginal note: The wise man.] could have been defeated." Hence the wise man praises him who could transgress and did not transgress, do evil and did not do it: His goods shall finally be established in the Lord, so that he may no longer depart from order, peace, and quiet.

--- Page 926 ---
TONVS SEXTVS. 393

How man is at variance due to sin. Ch. VII.

[Marginal note: Licentius.]
[Decorative initial C] ONSEQUENTLY, when man often recedes from God, then he errs, sins, and falls short of the order which God values so highly: as the wise Licentius says in Augustine's book 'On Order': "I accept something manifest: but nothing seems to me to happen outside of order: For whatever things are from God, are ordered: But whatever things are apart from God, or without God, or beyond God, are disordered." And consequently, guilt, disorder, dissension, lack of rectitude, defect, sin, and nothingness. But alas, we enter a most foul and dreadful forest, describing that which is nothing: And declaring disorder to be evil in that work which is governed by the supreme moderator ordering all things. Indeed, disorder is evil, and a defect from that which is: and that which is good. Nor is evil a substance: because its being is to be in another. Nor is it an accident: because it is contrary to good, and consequently in the genus of good: since contraries are of the same genus: and true good is a substance in itself. Nor is it an existent thing: because whatever is of this kind has the nature of good. Nor is it above all existent things: because that is God, and the supreme good. Nor is it absolutely nothing: because evil is contrary to good: and vice to virtue. But nothing is not contrary to anything: because things that are contrary are something. Nor is good contrary to itself. Therefore, evil is a medium between being and nothing, having being in which the defect itself exists, founded on the rectitude which ought to be in that which is. Which defect is a certain privation founded in being, but tending towards nothing. Therefore, just as good is above all being: where whatever tends towards it is perfected: so evil is below all being: into which tending, it fails. And just as by thinking of good, which is above all being (as it pleases the [Marginal note: Academics. Dionysius.] Academics and Dionysius), we are finally resolved into being: so also, thinking of evil, we arrive at a certain privation. Therefore, evil in nature is a defect and a privation of natural order and perfection. Hence woman is evil (as [Marginal note: Pythagoras.] Pythagoras used to say) because she falls short of the perfection of man. So too darkness, because it falls short of light: and anything orphaned or monstrous: because it falls short of the order instituted by nature. And evil in morals is a defect from rectitude: which ought to be in the act and operation which we perform: or a dissension from the supreme good, to which we ought to adhere. And it is found in privation, a fugitive from the region of light and being, weak, miserable, tearing, destroying: and not only dissenting from good, but leading away from it.

Just as man falls short of God and is at odds with Him through sin: so through penitence he is brought back and tempered. Ch. VIII.

[Decorative initial D] HEREFORE, man, falling short of God and being at odds with Him through sin, has a unique antidote, that he may return and agree with God Himself. And this is true penitence: which is not (as some assert) the holding of punishment, or sorrow for sins voluntarily assumed, but a return to God, from whom he had receded: as the etymology of a more perfect language indicates: For penitence is called in Hebrew *teshuvah*, which means 'return'. Many, for

DDD

--- Page 927 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

who grieve and are tormented by very great punishments because of the sin committed, yet they are neither freed nor justified, because they do not have the antidote for sin, which is to return to God, from whom they departed, and to agree with God, from whom they dissent. Hence the voice of the oracle always thunders to the sinner: "Return, or convert."
[Marginal note: Zechariah. Jeremiah.] "Turn to me" (he says in Zechariah) "and I will turn to you." And through another prophet: "But you have played the harlot with many lovers, nevertheless return to me, and I will receive you." And this is the same as that which the Savior laid as the foundation of his sermons: "Repent, and the kingdom
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] of heaven will draw near." For what is the kingdom of heaven if not God, who turns to us when we turn to him? And because then he dwelt with us in a special way, and now, having assumed human nature, he offered us an easier way of returning to God himself, therefore he said that the kingdom of heaven, and God himself, to whom we tend through true penance, was drawing near to us. If, however, to this conversion, which presupposes withdrawal and fasting from all illicit pleasure, sorrow and affliction follow, this is by accident, and not of the essence of penance or of that conversion. For many afflictions follow sin, from which, however, a man is not called penitent. Nor should anyone think someone to be penitent because he assumes voluntary sorrow, because this is sometimes in sin. For just as sorrow follows the act of conversion, so it follows sin, because every disorder brings with it affliction and punishment. For no one can directly will sorrow, because sadness (as
[Marginal note: Augustine.] Augustine says) is that which arises from things we do not want. The occasion of sorrow differs, however: because in the penitent there is progress towards good, but in the sinner there is a fall and a headlong rush, or evil. True tempering of the soul, therefore, is a return, application, and adaptation with God in truth and affection, just as the Lord seeks through Joel,
[Marginal note: Joel.] saying: "Return to me with all your heart," that is, with full affection, "in fasting from things that lead away from God himself, in weeping and lamentation," so that by tears drawn from your eyes, you may move the divine eyes and the fount of his clemency to distill grace for your watering. For our weeping eye moves the fount of divine piety, which in the mystical language is called by the same word as the eye. For both are called `ayin` [ע]. Hence, just as in name, so also in reality they have a symbol, and from this, the movement of one easily leads to the movement of the other, as we have said elsewhere concerning the strings of a well-tuned lyre.

Through Sacraments man is made more perfect in himself, and more resonant with God. Chapter IX.

[Decorative initial E]
AND if this return to God sufficiently tempers man with Him, nevertheless something more remains to be tempered, since it is a great, indeed a very great thing, for him who by nature, as it were, dissents, to agree with Him who is by nature harmonious. For man, born from the beginning a son of wrath and subject to sin, dissents, and in the course of life, even if he is just, seven times (as he says

--- Page 928 ---
TONE SIXTH. 394

wise man says) falls daily: And he who thinks himself immune from sin, deceives himself [marginal note: Wise man.]
(as John says) and the truth is not in him: [marginal note: John.]
which is true agreement, and harmony with the highest truth. But God, since He is the first rule moderating all contingent things, is always harmonious: indeed, that one, and harmonious virtue: through which all things that agree are rendered harmonious. Hence sacraments are ordained as signs of a sacred and divine thing: and in a certain way, effective causes. For they are efficacious signs of divine grace and favor: which is granted to man in them, so that he may be led to due harmony with God. Since therefore man is born a son of wrath, and discordant with sin, for his tempering, the sacrament of baptism has been given: in which he is washed, and tempered with God, not only by the virtue and efficacy of the sacrament itself, but by the favor of the institutor: provided that the recipient is well disposed. Man also disagrees, and fails in daily operations, in which neither the whole mind, nor the whole soul, nor all powers agree, as the law commands: therefore, daily defect and disharmony. For the tempering of which, the sacrament of penance has been given: by which, both by reason of conversion to God (as we have said) and by the efficacy of the sacrament and absolution, discordant things are made to fit together. And because we are infected and distempered by continuous nourishment, the sacrament of the Eucharist has been ordained: by which we repair that which has been infected by other foods: and we dispose the body of our humility, so that it may be fitted and conformed to the body of His glory. And that which in the generation of offspring is defiled by the enticement of the flesh, and becomes discordant: that is repaired by the sacrament of matrimony, duly observed. Two other sacraments have been assigned, quite opportune: one of which is confirmation, or the strengthening of that which was done in baptism: especially in those who received it with weak virtue and no positive disposition, namely, in their first and infantile age. The other is called extreme unction, in which we intend to abolish, and perfectly cleanse man from all contagion, and from all (if any remains) discord. There is also another sacrament, by which the hierarch is instituted in this mystical body, and is raised to be its head with a beard: from whom, and through whom, the sacred chrism, anointing all things and tempering all things, descends even to the hem of the garment of that body itself: as it is said in the Davidic psalm: "Like the precious oil upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard: that went down to the skirts of his garments." [marginal note: David.] Which chrism, or which influx, is called by another metaphor the dew of Hermon, that is, of that place from which sadness has been anathematized: for Hermon is interpreted as "anathema of sorrow," Which dew first descends upon Mount Zion, that is, upon those who are placed as watchmen over others: And from there it is diffused to the whole city, and the assembly of the faithful. Whence also through that chrism, or dew, blessing and life even unto ages is bestowed.
                                                                                                DDD ij

--- Page 929 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**
**It is expiated by sacrifices. Chapter X.**

[Large initial P] After man has been tempered by penance, and furthermore led by the fuller
dignity of the sacraments, it remains that through sacrifices
(with which he also has no small affinity), thoroughly,
**Heracli.** expiated, he may be found worthy of God. For sacrifices are (as Hera-
clitus says) certain remedies for souls instituted by the supreme physician: For an
**Proculus** evil demon possesses man (says Proculus) until he is expiated by sacrifices.
And then, the evil demon having been put to flight, he returns to God. But the true sacrifice,
purifying, tempering, and uniting, is twofold. One is that which the high
priest Christ offered for the remission of all sins, making
peace through the blood of his cross, whether things in heaven or things on earth. Which
pacification renders man, now expiated, harmonious with God in supreme concord,
and most sweetly attuned. The other sacrifice is to offer oneself pure,
immaculate, and perfect to God as a living sacrifice, holy and pleasing
**Porphy.** to God. Concerning this, Porphyry also says in "On Abstinence from Animal Food": Let us worship
God with silence, care, religion, with pure and true opinions about Him, striving
to be assimilated to Him, and to be united with Him;
and to offer the sanctity of our life as a sacrifice, and to adapt it to sacred things.
Our Christ indicated that He expected this, while speaking with the Samaritan woman,
**CHRISTVS.** saying: "There will be true worshipers who will worship the Father in spirit
and truth." For God is spirit: and He seeks worshipers conformed to Himself:
But so that we might be conformed to Him, having become spiritual, indeed, converted
into a better spirit, Christ willed to mortify Himself, offered as a supreme burnt offering:
so that He might offer us to God, indeed mortified in flesh,
**Idem.** but vivified in spirit. Therefore, so that we may be conformed to God and united,
our animal (nature) must be mortified: so that the spiritual may rise and grow strong.
And this is what He says, John reporting: "If a grain of wheat falling into the earth
dies, namely according to the flesh and blood, it brings forth much fruit." And again:
"It is the spirit that gives life; the flesh profits nothing." Hence the high
priest Christ offered Himself, and taught us to be offered together with Him, when
He said: "Do this in remembrance of me, and in imitation, namely offering
yourselves, just as I was offered." For He commanded the mystery of the
body to be commemorated, already offered as a sacrifice, mortified by the passion, and now
vivified in spirit: so that what He said about the sacrament of His body, to be eaten by us,
and to be offered by Him on the cross, and for a commemoration to be made for Him, could be applied to it.
"The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life."
Into which spirit and into which life all our things must be brought back, if we wish to attain God.

--- Page 930 ---
TONE SIX. 395

It is cleansed by alms. Chapter XI.
[P] Oſt temperate penance, harmonious sacraments, and expiatory sacrifices, so that man may not be led away by any defilement from communion and union with God, there follows an ablution, which, after that baptismal one, is performed through alms. I would by no means dare to assert this, unless the highest truth taught me this, saying: "Give alms, and all things are clean for you." For it is a certain water flowing from super-mundane springs, just as it is said in Ecclesiasticus: "As water extinguishes fire, so alms extinguish sin." [Marginal note: Eccleſi] The same thing Daniel taught the king of Babylon in other words, saying: "Redeem your sins with alms." And the angel Raphael in Tobit: "Alms deliver from sin and from death." [Marginal note: Thobi.] My reason, however, is, because (as Rabbi Simeon Benoicai says) [Marginal note: Si. Ben.] even if every rule sometimes fails, this one never fails: "With the same measure you have measured, it will be measured back to you." [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] For this is the rule of the highest Truth, which again says: "Give, and it will be given to you." And again: As a guarantor, it teaches that we may confidently say to the Father: "Forgive us, as we forgive: Give, as we give." Therefore, just as a man is pious towards his neighbor, remitting debts, spending, and giving from his own, so he feels God to be most pious and a most generous giver towards him, and so much more abundantly, the more munificent he who spends is. Hence the munificent rewarder himself said: "You will receive a hundredfold for one, and you will possess eternal life."

Man Resounds with Virtues. Chapter XII.
[A] Bluted, therefore, and temperate man, and with instruments arranged, desires to render harmonious melodies. But at first glance, he feels difficulty, [Marginal note: Plato.] because (as Plato says) our soul, coming from God and enclosed in the body, suffers dissonance. To compose which, harmony was given by the Muses, which render the movements of our soul harmonious and kindred, provided that man uses them well, embracing suitable virtues. Explaining this, [Marginal note: Chalcid.] Chalcidius says: "When the Creator fashioned the soul in the higher realms according to harmonic reason, and commanded all its actions to consist of rhythms and modes, but these things are accustomed to fade away due to the companionship of the body, which it necessarily obtains, whence the souls of many will be without measure. Therefore, for the remedy of this defect, he established music: not that by which the common people are delighted, and which excites to pleasure, and often to vices, but that divine music, which is never separated from intelligence." For Plato [Marginal note: Plato.] considers this to recall wandering souls from the right path to their ancient harmony. Furthermore, the best harmony is in our morals and in the justice of all virtues by moderation, through which each of the other virtues performs its duty and work: so that reason indeed may be the guide, and the inner vigor, similar to wrath, may offer itself as an aid to reason. Furthermore, these things cannot arise without modulation. But modulation without harmony is nothing: But harmony itself is intelligence, and a concert of virtues adorning the soul, and rational-
DDD iij

--- Page 931 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

again recalling it to its ancient nature, and finally making it such as God the Creator had made it from the beginning, namely, so that it might resound with virtues. Although these are fourfold, all are nevertheless found to be harmonious, like the strings of a lyre: some of which are lowest and deeper, some in the middle, and some higher and sharper. For virtues are all works proceeding from a well-strung instrument, indeed named from *vir* (man). Or because it is harmonious, it is thus defined by grammarians: Virtue is a disposition of the soul consistent with the mode of nature. However, in the sense in which it is named from *vir* (man), they describe it thus: Virtue is a constant and fitting affection of the soul, making those in whom it is praiseworthy; or, Virtue is a strong and unconquered patience in enduring things: for *vir* (man), as they say, implies strength or fortitude. If, however, we approach the sacred and proper idiom and wish to name it, it will be necessary to observe by what words in that language *homo* (human being) and *vir* (man) are called. For *homo* (human being) is called אדם Adam, אנוש Enos, and גבר Geber, for diverse reasons to be passed over for now. And this alone must be noted: that in any of those names there is either one or no letter of divinity. But *vir* (man) is called איש Ish, in which word there are two letters of divinity, namely א aleph and י iod, where they imply that a man endowed with virtue is twice divine: namely by nature, by which he contains the image of God; and by virtue, by which he contains the likeness. According to this mystery, virtue can thus be defined: Virtue is an operation assimilating man to God, and deifying him.

Another thing to be observed in this word אדם Adam is that there are two quadrarian letters: namely ד dalet, which signifies four, and ם mem, which signifies forty. From which they imply that man is composed of two quadratures, and imbued with some divinity, denoted by the א itself. Which is indicated clearly enough in those words: "God made man dust from the earth" (for which we have "from the clay of the earth"), "and breathed into his nostrils the breath of lives." Where three things are touched upon: dust, earth, and breath. For earth is one of the four lower elements; עפר Aphar, which we call dust, or better, Atomos, indicates a more subtle body suitable for the spirit, as is known to the learned. But that divine breath is poured into us, which our people call the higher portion. From which, with our animal nature (as Plotinus holds), the rational soul sprouts forth. [Marginal note: Plotinus] But when, from this double quadrature, through the mediation of virtue, the whole man is reduced to that divine (state) and passes into God, then he changes the quadrarian and elementary letter into a mark of divinity; and with great mystery, he reduces another quadrarian letter to the triple hundred denoted by ש (shin) in the third letter of the word signifying *vir* (man). And to put it briefly, through virtues and other purgative means, the animal and earthly man is made spiritual and celestial: according to that of the apostle: "The first man is of the earth, earthly. The second man is of heaven, heavenly." And again: "As we have borne the image of the earthly, let us also bear the image of the heavenly." [Marginal note: Paul] This transition from earthly man to heavenly man is made through fourfold virtues, as if through four steps: through civil or moral virtues,

--- Page 932 ---
**TONE SIX. 398**

[Marginal note: Plotin.] through purgative, heroic, and exemplary virtues. About which Plotinus, and others, treat very extensively. But we, briefly summarizing, say: that man toils in moral or civil virtues: In purgative virtues he prevails: In heroic virtues he rejoices: In exemplary virtues he shines, and attains divinity. And although there is labor in the first three kinds of virtues, according to what the [Marginal note: Paulus.] apostle says to Timothy: "Toil as a good soldier of Christ": nevertheless, especially in civil and moral virtues, there is labor unredeemed by any delight: which is present in the other, better virtues. Whence it is widely proclaimed to the novice on the path of virtues that it is [Marginal note: Basilius.] arduous and difficult, the journey of virtues itself. Therefore Basil [says]: "The way of virtue is at first rough, and almost impassable, and full of continuous sweat and labors." Therefore great strength is required because of the arduousness of undertaking it: nor is it [Marginal note: Lactan.] easy for one striving to ascend to its summit.

--- Page 933 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

another law in my members fighting against the law of my mind: and leading me captive to the law of sin, but let him say: I chastise my body, and bring it into subjection. Then, freed from the most unhappy bond, he rejoices even in any adversity, which harms the purged man minimally, but the flesh: which he now hates, and has brought into subjection, as a most cruel enemy. Hence he rejoices as a righteous man, who has seen the enemy pay the penalties deserved by God. Thus the apostles, purged and strengthened by that holy spirit, went rejoicing from the presence of the council: because they were considered worthy to suffer ignominy for the name of JESUS. And [Marginal note: Paulus. Petrus.] Paul with the Colossians: Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you. And Peter: Rejoice, partaking in the sufferings of Christ. And this is true heroic virtue, to rejoice and be glad in every adversity brought upon the body, and upon our animal (nature), indeed a most bitter enemy. And so much is it to be rejoiced in: that we now consider it a pledge and guarantee of blessedness. To this therefore Christ speaks, when he says: [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] Blessed are the poor in spirit, that is, fasting from the desires of lower things, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: and the delight of heavenly and divine things: Blessed are the meek, that is, gentle and giving no offense to anyone, with the impulse of anger and vengeance extinguished, or at least suppressed, which is in the flesh and blood crying out from the earth, that is, from this earthly body, for they shall inherit the earth, that is, of the living, from which evildoers and defiled ones are expelled. Blessed are those who mourn, either from nearby adversities or also indignant about the prolonged dwelling in this most miserable worldly valley, in which, already purged, he lives impatiently, always aspiring to heavenly things, having now shaken off the weight pulling him down. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness: How excellently these degrees of perfection succeed one another. The purged man abstains from the desire for lower things: Hence, envying no one and desiring nothing, he becomes meek. Afterwards, sympathizing and mourning over the evil of another, he is saddened, and also about the prolongation of this prison (of life): whence he hungers and thirsts for God's righteousness, and all heavenly things: by which he may truly be satisfied. Afterwards he becomes beneficent towards his neighbor, and inflamed with true charity, he would wish to draw everyone with him: whence it follows: Blessed are the merciful, compassionate, and pious towards their neighbor, for they shall obtain mercy and piety. Finally, perfectly purged, indeed adorned with purity and cleanliness, they are introduced into the presence of the king: whence it follows: Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. They shall therefore see, united and in harmony with Him, in perfect peace and complete tranquility, which we obtain from peace: concerning which it is added: Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called children of God, now raised to a sublime degree, and fortified by perfect charity, which casts out fear. For intrepid and secure, they dare to undertake all arduous things: and [Marginal note: Idem.] they endure all things with a joyful spirit, having already obtained the kingdom of heaven: which (to teach with the highest truth) is within us. Hence he says: Blessed are those who suffer persecution for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. These therefore are deified through exemplary virtues, and shine for others. Nor would I dare to assert that men attain to divinity...

--- Page 934 ---
TONE SIX. 397

...attain divinity, unless John taught me with open speech, saying: He gave them the power to become children of God. But they shine according to that highest truth: Let your light shine before [Marginal note: CHRIST] men, so that you may be seen by them: For a candle or lamp, when lit, is not placed under a bushel, but on a lampstand, so that it may give light to all who are in the house. Indeed, a lit and shining lamp is he who has already ascended to the highest peak of virtue, [Marginal note: John the Baptist. CHRIST. Moses.] perfected: as Christ said of John the Baptist, the greatest among those born of women: "He was a burning and shining lamp." And as Moses was: whose not only virtue, but also face shone so brightly that the children of Israel could not look at that face, because of the splendor of his countenance: for darkened eyes are overwhelmed by shining light. Hence we shall be silent about many things that we could say concerning the splendors which proceed from those perfect ones who have already attained exemplary virtues.

By reading, man imbibes that by which he can modulate. Chapter XIII.

**H**aving been purified, adorned, and made harmonious, man ought now, introduced before the king, to modulate something harmoniously. But that which must be sung occurs, which man knows least, unless he learns it from him who seeks harmony: for he composed all the songs to be recounted there, and presented them to us to be easily read, though many are obscure and difficult. [Marginal note: Baruch 3.] There is none (says Baruch) who seeks the ways of the Lord, nor who devises His paths: But He who knows all things, knows them. He found every way of discipline, and delivered it, written indeed to Jacob His servant, and to Israel His beloved: opening to some the most hidden and wondrous sacraments contained therein. [Marginal note: David.] Among whom was he who said: "Reveal my eyes, and I will consider the wonders of Your law." Baruch continues: After this, He was seen on earth, and conversed with men, delivering the same discipline in a better form: which four wrote down, who were close to Christ, yet with this law and form, that according to [Marginal note: CHRIST] the teacher's edict, what is holy should not be given to dogs, nor pearls exposed to be trampled by swine: for the secrets of the Most High King are not to be revealed. Hence the divine psalmist sings: "I have hidden Your words in my heart, that I might not sin against You." And because strangers, and those not well initiated in divine and sacred matters, cannot grasp them: [Marginal note: David.] but like strangers hear someone speaking in a language unknown to them: and stand (as they say) like donkeys at a lyre: therefore the prophet again sings: "How shall we sing [Marginal note: CHRIST] the Lord's song in a foreign land?" Therefore, our wisest preacher Christ spoke with this law and reason, that only the more intimate disciples would understand the mystery of the kingdom of God: while the others would perceive only parables. For sacred scripture is like a human body: in which there is skin, flesh, and bones with marrow. Many see the skin, but not the flesh: much less the bones with marrow. The literal sense, indeed, is like the skin, known by all: and hidden from no one who looks. But the moral or allegorical sense is like the flesh covered by the skin, nevertheless perceptible by one who looks within. The anagogical, moreover, and divine sense is like...

--- Page 935 ---
**THE THIRD CANTICLE**

'But the anagogical and divine is as if the most hidden bones, covered by flesh and skin, and full of marrow. Nor indeed is the marrow explainable, which is contained most richly in the bones, and [which is] the power of the sacred scriptures: because it is that which transcends all human intellect, nor is it perceptible: unless He who delivered it declares it. Therefore, in the very ancient books of the law itself, in which it was given, as well as in the newest, where it is explained by the commentaries of Christ and the disciples, and nowhere else do we look or receive, from where we may sing all hidden and more secret canticles. From here, therefore, the sweetest songs must be sought by us, of which it is said: "How sweet are your words to my throat, sweeter than honey to my mouth:" And again: "The judgments of the Lord are true, justified in themselves: more desirable than gold, and precious stone: and sweeter than honey, and honeycomb." For they are right, and consistent in themselves, and from this gladdening the heart, and enlightening the eyes: and so delighting the whole person, that blessed is he who dwells in them: as the same prophet sings elsewhere: "Blessed is he whom you have instructed, O Lord: and taught him from your law."

[Marginal note: David.]
[Marginal note: The same.]

He introduces with meditation. Chapter 14.

[Decorative initial E depicting a figure in a landscape] Indeed, the holy scripture blesses, converts souls, and grants wisdom to the little ones, provided that the reader meditates on it, and is admitted as a ruminating and clean animal, which is offered as a sacrifice to God through the study of sacred scripture. Hence in a Davidic song it is proclaimed blessed is he who meditates on the law of the Lord day and night: And in another song: "Blessed are those who search his testimonies." Which not only praises, but observes: while it says: "My eyes anticipated you at dawn, or my eyes anticipated the watches, or vigils, that I might meditate on your words:" And that is what is commanded in the repetition of the law: "The words which I command you today shall be in your heart: and you shall meditate on them sitting in your house: and walking on the way, and sleeping, and rising up: and you shall bind them, so that they may never be moved from your eyes." Indeed, they are not to be bound with linen or silk thread, as superstitious observers of the law were accustomed to do, but with firm tenacity of mind: so that you may always have from where you are stirred, and led to the sweetest harmony, which is contained in them, manifold, indeed, of every kind. For there are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden, from there, therefore, we can meditate, from where we may sing not only of the wandering moon, and the labors of the sun; of which the latter, like a rooster, impregnates the whole heaven: while the former, like a womb, receiving effects from all the stars, explains them to us: but from where we may make resound the melody of the whole machine, and of its guests, and of its archetype, and of its maker, and of all things together. For all things are accustomed to be sung in it in wonderful ways, provided we know how to search it thoroughly: and it is given to us, that with unveiled face we may behold the glory of the Lord contained in it, proceeding from clarity to clarity, until, supported by the grace of God, we reach the fount of light inaccessible to our powers. Hence, meditating in the scripture itself is considered blessed, not only in the Davidic hymns, but also by Plato, who says in Phaedrus: "Divine medita-

[Marginal note: The same.]
[Marginal note: The same.]
[Marginal note: Deuteronomy.]

--- Page 936 ---
TONE SIXTH. 398

-tations he who rightly uses, and is always imbued with perfect mysteries, truly alone becomes perfect. Therefore, separated from human studies and adhering to divine ones, he is criticized by the multitude as if placed outside himself: but he himself, full of God, is hidden from the multitude: And what the common people consider wealth, he himself judges to be the greatest indigence: Hence, impatient with these lower things, because he tastes heavenly things, he yearns for them, and, anxious for them, he prays.

He orders by prayer. Chapter XV.

[Ornate initial S] o he recognizes his indigence, procures what is necessary, and asks for that which he still lacks. For since we are all parts of the universe, we need the universe: as Proclus teaches from the sources of Porphyry [Marginal note: Proclus] and other wise men. And since for every nature, salvation and preservation most truly depends on its conversion to its own totality, he who desires to possess virtue must insist on prayers, and frequently make supplication, that He may infuse it, who contains all virtue in Himself, and is the supreme good: and the cause of every goodness, existing not only by a certain series and succession, but immediately producing all things, even if you consider matter itself. Nor is divinity removed or distant from anyone: but it is equally present to all: since each thing exists by the gift of God. Nor is there anything outside God: since He Himself embraces and comprehends all things: And whatever we imagine outside God, is utterly nothing. Iamblichus adds the necessity of prayers beyond all expectation: because all [Marginal note: Iambli] things are produced and guarded by the Gods, by the command of the highest. Therefore, he who desires to be saved must pray to those who save: from whom things cannot be separated: For every created thing torn from its parents and root, immediately slips into non-being and perdition: especially those things which, although they have proceeded into themselves, nevertheless remain in their parent: such as all created things, which begin from God, and end in God Himself, according to the perfecting trinity, by which they proceed from God, exist in themselves, and tend towards God Himself. For all created things form a certain circuit (as Proclus explains from the mind of Plato), [Marginal note: Proculus] beginning from God, and ending in God Himself, like the line of a circle, which closes where it begins. But that they may return, they need the favor of those from whom they proceeded: And favor is obtained by prayers, whose purpose is to persuade both angels and also God, that He may command, and they may guard with perpetual protection: and may lead it back to where we came from. For what is (he says) each thing without consent and return to God: and without that harmony which they call sympathy? And although prayer is necessary for all, yet especially for upright men, since it is a certain application and conjunction of them to God: For like is naturally inclined to be intertwined and joined with like: But the upright and whole man is similar to God: hence he must be intertwined with Him, so that he may obtain help: by which he may be drawn away from the blind prison and chains of the body, in which existing, he wanders from Him to whom he is similar: and to whom he came to be united. And just as children taken away from their parents implore, driven by nature, until they re-

--- Page 937 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

...until they return: thus we, separated and alienated from the true Father of all, so that we may be led back, it is necessary to pray to Him and supplicate Him. Hence some academics called those orphans and lacking both parents, who, despising prayers and supplications, neglected to turn to the higher and divine nature. Therefore, among various nations of men, whoever, led by virtue, claimed a name for themselves, exercised themselves in the study of prayers and supplications: such as the Brahmins among the Indians, the Magi among the Persians, the theologians among the Greeks, the Chaldeans in Assyria: who established the festivals of the Gods and hidden mysteries, venerating them with prayers:
[Marginal note: Brach. Magi. Theolo. Chaldæi.]
How much more ought this to be done by us, for whom the gate of heaven is now opened? However many well-composed souls, uttered voices, or intense thoughts directed to God for tempering needs: or for obtaining certain gifts, so many are the sweetest songs offered to God, beyond the praises and hymns which we frequently render in His honor.
[Marginal note: Proculus]
However, for composing those songs as perfectly as possible, Proclus offers five most precise instructions: The first of these is the knowledge of the divine orders: to which he who prays approaches: For he cannot properly and readily approach who is ignorant of their properties. Therefore the oracle, or divine responses, command that the first notion in the sacred worship of God be the kindling of fire:
[Marginal note: Leuitic.]
Which we do not doubt to have been received from Mosaic institutions: For in Leviticus, by the command of the supreme oracle, it is prescribed: 'Fire on my altar shall always burn.' After this, the second place is held by our kinship and affinity to God Himself, according to our multifaceted sincerity, purification, and faithfulness in what has been entrusted to us:
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
according to that which the supreme teacher says: 'Whoever does the will of my Father who is in heaven, he is my brother, sister, and mother.' The third in order is contact, according to which we touch the divine essence with the very highest part of the soul, and, inclined towards it, we rely on it.
[Marginal note: Ioannes.]
In which sense (as I believe) John says: 'That which we have heard, and seen, and touched concerning the word of life.' Fourth in place follows
[Marginal note: Dauid.]
application, or adherence: for thus the oracle calls it. Which we also have expressly in the Davidic psalm, where it is said: 'But for me, to cling to God is good.' In the oracle, however: 'A mortal adhering to fire will have the light of divinity:' For this offers us great communion and a more evident participation in the divine light: and it leads through similarity of character and intense affection. The last is union, which places that one thing which is in the soul into the unity of God: and renders us stable, reducing us to one act: according to which we are not our own, but God's, remaining in the divine light: and embraced by Him in a circle: And this is the best end of true prayers, that it may apply the conversion itself to abiding: and may place and establish everything that proceeds from the one God, back in the one. This also is the true and perfect harmony: which only a righteous and truly good man can possess. This is also an easy and most expeditious path to a happy and blessed life, while we are elevated by prayers and ascend to God.

--- Page 938 ---
**TONVS SEXTVS. 399**
**Contemplation is introduced. Chapter XVI.**

[Decorative initial V] But when we ask in prayer, we do not yet have what we desire; but after prayer has been heard, and the desired gift has now been obtained, we are introduced to the inner sanctuaries, in which it is permitted to gaze upon those eternal spectacles with full delight of the soul. And this is true contemplation, just as Richard well defines it in his book *De Arca Mystica*, saying: Contemplation is the free perspicacity of the mind suspended in admiration at the spectacles of wisdom. For the Lord, moved by prayers, sometimes opens one of very many chambers, into which, having entered, with eyes enlightened, one sees the spectacles of divine wisdom, most hidden from the common folk. And because they extend infinitely, the mind of the beholder, unable to penetrate all, remains suspended in admiration. For (as it is said in Ecclesiasticus): "Exalt the Lord as much as you can, for he is greater than all praise. For who can magnify him as he is? Many things are hidden, greater than these." For even the blessed see few of his works and his infinite magnificence, who, although they see him as he is, do not see how great he is; because he is infinite. But they have determined degrees of their virtue. Hence Isaiah, speaking intimately with God himself, says: "Truly, you are a hidden God." Hidden indeed, and manifest; for God is in all things, hence manifest to all. And he is hidden in himself, as if covered in an abyss of his own darkness, hidden from all, as it is said in a Davidic psalm: "He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him were dark waters and thick clouds of the skies." Behold how he is covered by darkness, a pavilion, and dark waters. And sometimes, with impediments broken, he appears open and manifest; whence it follows: "At the brightness before him his clouds passed, hail stones and coals of fire. The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice," making himself manifest to whom and when he wills; not only in this immense machinery of the world, but dealing with a particular man, he sometimes hides his face from him, and says: "No man shall see me, and live." Sometimes he speaks face to face, acting very intimately; whence the royal prophet prayed, saying: "Show your face, and we shall be saved." Which face God shows us especially in prayer, as Job says concerning God approaching: "He will pray to God, and he will be gracious to him: and he shall see his face with joy." Therefore, man returns to God through prayer. Having arrived there (says Plato in *Phaedrus*), he stops his horses and enters the chamber of the symposium, where he is fed ambrosia and drinks nectar. This ambrosia is that manna, of which it is said: "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it." But that nectar is that of which the heavenly teacher says in the Gospel: "I will drink it new with you in my Father's house." For this (Plato continues) is the life of the gods and of happy men: that, reflected in God by a circular motion, they may be fed with his food, and, turned towards him, may rest in him. For the progression is direct (as Dionysius holds) when it is from God to creatures; but the reflection or reversion of the creature is circular in
[Marginal note: Ricar.]
[Marginal note: Ecclefia.]
[Marginal note: Iſaias.]
[Marginal note: Dauid.]
[Marginal notes: Idem. Iob.]
[Marginal note: Plato.]
[Marginal notes: CHRISTVS. Plato.]
[Marginal note: Diony.]

--- Page 939 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

God: which occurs when the course of life is completed, and sometimes even before the soul is fully separated from the body; and this is when it is given to man, that with the veil removed, and the face revealed, he may behold the glory of the Lord, ascending from glory to glory. And this is true contemplation. For that reflection which occurs through riddles or images, is a kind of speculation or discourse; but that which occurs immediately concerning God, as in a clear mirror, is contemplation, as Augustine rightly believes. Therefore Rachel, whom they interpret as "seeing the beginning" or "seeing God," is most aptly taken for the contemplative life or mind, which beholds not through riddles, nor through creatures, but God Himself, and the principle in which all things shine forth. And this is the best portion, indeed the end and completion of the entire course which we await; to which Philip, imbued with some supernatural light, [Marginal note: Philip.] aspired when he said: "Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us." And because the Father and the Son are the same, therefore He will answer here saying: "Philip, he who sees me, sees also my Father," because whatever shines forth in one, shines most fully in the other also.

United by Love. Chapter XVII.

[Decorative initial 'I'] NTO the mirror of divine clarity, therefore, the subjected mind also feels a fiery heat, which follows from that reverberating light; whence it melts, dissolves, and finally is fused into one with God Himself, who illuminates it. Nor let the pedants oppose this truth, who wish to bind Him who is absolved from all laws with the laws of inferior mathematics, ineptly saying that there is no proportion of the finite to the infinite, and consequently no union. Moreover, since God is most simple, He admits no union or mixture. For He Himself is one, most simple in many, perhaps in a better way than the sun, which is unique in all the illuminated places of the whole earth. And since this (sun), illuminating and warming all things, admits no mixture, much less does He, who is most simple, pervading all things and transforming all things into Himself at will. Nor is it surprising, because if this lowest fire, burning wood, converts it into itself, suffering no mixture, much more does that fire, of which it is said in Deuteronomy: [Marginal note: Deutero] "God is a consuming fire," convert into itself without mixture those whom it ignites. For consuming with fiery and vital power, it converts food into the nature of the consumer. Nor is a proportion of quantity or virtue required in the first cause, entirely absolved from every law of secondary causes, such as is required in secondary causes themselves, which are subject to their own laws; for that first cause, although it is of infinite power and exceeds the proportion of all inferior things, nevertheless extends to producing even the smallest thing. Which also unites to itself at will, although it infinitely exceeds. For what in inferior things is a proportion of greater inequality in the agent, that in the first cause is an all-encompassing excess; yet the agent is the first cause itself, according to the virtue determined by itself, [Marginal note: Theolo.] because it operates freely (as our entire theology pro-

--- Page 940 ---
TONVS SEXTVS. 400

proclaims) and not according to all-encompassing virtue, as those falsely assert [Marginal note: Philosophers] who opine that God acts necessarily. Therefore, the law of proportion holds in those things which are of determined virtue, and not in the most excellent agent: who exceeds all natural power: and to whose nod all things are ready: both before they exist, that they may come into being: and after they have been made, that they may be reduced back into Him: but especially man, who is capable of Him: and by his very nature born to be united: provided that that power of love intervenes, which unites the lover with the beloved: and makes two, I will not say into one flesh, but into one spirit, as Paul says: [Marginal note: Paul] 'He who adheres to God becomes one spirit with Him.' Which union occurs not only through love and affection, concerning which [Marginal note: John] it is said: 'God is love, and he who remains in love remains in God, and God in him.' But also through transmutation, which occurs through a certain ecstasy and excess.

He is transmuted by ecstasy and excess. Chapter XVIII.

[Large decorative initial N] ot therefore content (as some do) to lead man up to union with God, we will endeavor to lead him to a further and ultimate degree: namely, to the transmutation of the body into spirit: and of the spirit into God. Concerning one of which the apostle says: [Marginal note: Paul] 'We await the Savior, our Lord JESUS Christ: who will transform the body of our lowliness, conforming it to the body of His glory.' And what kind of reformation this will be, he declares elsewhere, when he says: 'It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.' But concerning the other, the evangelist says: [Marginal note: John] 'He gave them power to become children of God: namely, while men are transformed into the same image: which is the Son of God.' Which transformation occurs through an excess of the mind and a certain ecstasy: [Marginal note: Hebrews David. Canticles.] which the Hebrews call the death of the kiss, concerning which it is said in a Davidic song: 'Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.' For in the excess of the mind, one dies through that kiss: concerning which the Wise One says in the Canticles: 'Let him kiss me with the kiss of his mouth.' For man, existing in an excess of mind, dies to the body, so that its life then scarcely lives, nor does it use its aid: although the body is by no means deprived of the soul's life-giving power. Which soul, leaning on God in that excess, is united to God by a certain kiss, so delighted by Him, that, forgetting all external things, and even the body itself, it leaves it living but deprived of senses, and half-dead, Which Paul explains, when he says: [Marginal note: Paul] 'You have died, and your life is hidden with Christ.' Who so receives the soul itself, and unites it with Himself, that it lives rather of Christ, than its own life, as the apostle again says: [Marginal note: The same] 'I live, yet not I; but Christ lives in me.' But since this transformation occurs not only through the illumination of the mind itself, but also through unifying love, which is a certain divine fire, melting, uniting, and transforming: I have deemed it opportune to publish a special tone on this: which we will append to this one.

--- Page 941 ---
OF THE THIRD CANTICLE

Concerning the harmony of the soul and body changed for the better through fire and resurrection. Seventh Tone.

[Decorative initial A]
Whether resurrection is possible. Chap. I.
Whether it has been and whether it will be. Chap. II.
Whether the future resurrection can be proven by arguments. Chap. III.
Who first granted access to resurrection, and how fittingly. Chap. IIII.
What things we have revealed concerning resurrection from the sacred scriptures. Chap. V.
If it can be discerned by any conjecture when this resurrection will be. Chap. VI.
By whose power resurrection is brought about. Chap. VII.
What the angelic voice and the trumpet of God are. Chap. VIII.
What change of bodies will be. Chap. IX.
Who are to be changed, and who not, and why. Chap. X.
With what flesh and with what body the sleeping ones are to be raised. Chap. XI.
What hair will not perish. Chap. XII.
With what members we are to rejoice. Chap. XIII.
With what fire the good are to be refined. Chap. XIIII.
With what particular fire the wicked are to be burned. Chap. XV.
How the wicked are to be tortured. Chap. XVI.
Resolution of the difficulty concerning this fire. Chap. XVII.

--- Page 942 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 401**
**WHETHER RESURRECTION IS POSSIBLE. Chapter One.**

O MAKER, that supreme one, whose spirit is the sweetest artisan of all, just as the highest harmony came forth into creation, and disposes and moderates it with tranquility: so at last will He lead it to a perfect and complete concert, by a happier and more perfect lot: and that will be, when all noisy and dissonant matter, which by its very nature tends to dissolution, has been laid aside, man, the most perfect work of God, will be fitted together with divinely perfect harmonies: so that he may always render to Him due and harmonious praises. For we lay aside that dissonant and horrid matter by death, so that we may take it up again, changed into a better lot: and sometimes by a certain most vehement power of the spirit we change it for the better: as first happened to Enoch, who walked with [Marginal note: Enoch.] God: and was not seen thereafter, namely in a perishable flesh, and subject to corruption. Elias also achieved this, who was carried up in a fiery chariot. Moses also: [Marginal note: Isaias Moses.] whose face, while still living among men, shone so brightly from divine communion: that the children of Israel could not look upon it because of the splendor radiating from it. Which was a most evident sign of a body already transformed for the better. Hence he did not see corruption: nor is he found among men, nor was he left to the power of the devil, like other corpses: but transformed into the nature of spirit, according to that of the Apostle, [Marginal note: Paul.] "It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body." Therefore, it is also indicated by Thaddaeus that he was brought back into the dominion of Michael, who is appointed prince over all souls and spirits to be received. And this is that dispute and altercation, which is said by the same (Thaddaeus) to have occurred with the devil concerning the body of Moses.

But since this transformation has been granted to very few, therefore, through the laying aside of this tabernacle, and the fiery power of the supreme arch-musician in the work of resurrection, we must arrive at that harmony: Concerning which Ambrose [Marginal note: Ambrose.] touches upon somewhat, when he says: "Let those who have tasted the first fruits of the resurrection make known to you, how the dissipated organ of the body will have been refitted into its former state of nerves: nay, rather, it will have been led into a better state with sweeter melodies, and such harmony, that it will never again be dissolved: but without any interruption, they will bless and praise the artisan of all with continuous praises." But before we describe this concert, virulent doubts must be removed from the minds of men, which infect the wholesome food of truth: which concerning our state and end are to be ruminated upon by us with continuous meditation: For the entire life of the wise and happy is a meditation not on bodily death and the dissolution of this our tabernacle, but on the death of the saints: which is precious in the sight of the Lord: and through which we live to God, and, transformed into a better lot, begin to taste that blessedness which we await. Hence we have deemed it necessary to preface how this resurrection and transformation is possible and true. Here
EEE

--- Page 943 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

Indeed, I cannot but marvel at the great many who give so much credence to the asser-
tion that it would be impossible for that which has once been destroyed to be able to return again, when
we daily observe these returns, repeatedly reiterated in most things, now
under one specific form, now under the same specific form. For from the body of a bull, beaten with clubs
and enclosed in a cell and buried in the earth, in a few, that is, about twenty days more or less,
bees are generated. But from an equine cadaver, beetles (are generated). But from the bodies of any
animals whatsoever, diverse worms (are generated), so that what was just now the matter of an ox, or of a
horse, becomes a bee, or a wasp. And often the same specific form is restored.
For lettuce, cabbage, wild thyme, parsley, and suchlike, produced from the earth,
yet by seminal virtue, are again resolved into the earth, with the seed preserved, in which
the virtue remains: by which, with the earth, they again produce the same things, so that they seem to rise
again every year. Yet they are not said to rise again: because they are not gods...

--- Page 944 ---
TONVS SEPTIMVS. 401

Afterwards they are changed into butterflies, which produce eggs as certain seeds; but these, warmed at the appointed time, again break forth into the same worms. Nor does the reiteration of man differ from these (as more secret theologians assert), whose bone, which they call Luz (לוז), of the size of a cleaned chickpea, subject to no fire, nor any corruption, is always preserved unharmed: from which (as they say) the whole animal body sprouts again, like a plant from a seed: with which, the same spirit and soul, which the Hebrews themselves call Nessaman, being resumed, a superior and spiritual man is constituted: just as the inferior man is constituted from reason and discourse, with our animal (nature), or with a celestial body, as it pleases the Platonists: into which body this heavy and corruptible (body) will be transformed according to the Apostle's opinion. For neither the sex of the body, nor grosser matter, is of the substance of man, as they suppose. Which we can prove from those things which happen in the transmutations of alchemists: where we see the whole substance of a thing, and its spirit, and life, reduced into a small amount of matter, and this (matter) liquid and rare, and freed from the fecal portion. No less, that which is animal and foul being left behind, that which is spiritual will rise again (as the Apostle says), indeed sufficient for man's integrity, nay, man will return equipped with a far better lot, transformed namely into an angel and into the very Son of God.

An resurrectio fuerit. Cap. II.

[Decorative initial S] But whether any resurrection of men has occurred, since it is merely contingent, it cannot be proven except by witnesses and the evidence of the fact: For we have many who attest that Christ rose from the dead, and gave pledges of his true resurrection. For he showed himself visible not only to the Apostles and women, but also to five hundred brothers at once or more, as Paul relates, and to many who were present when he ascended into heaven not without the admiration of those watching; moreover, he showed himself palpable and impassible to Thomas, when he fearlessly offered his wounds to be touched, without any fear of pain arising from the touching of the wounds themselves. Hence that cry of Thomas, arising with the greatest reason, by which he said: "My Lord and my God!" "Now (he said) I have known you as a faithful guarantor and patron, while you demonstrate the reward promised to faithful soldiers for their labors and death endured for your love. Now I know you as God, while you have changed this mortal and passible body into an immortal and impassible one, and this as a pledge of our body also to be changed. Which I infer from this, because I touch this fresh wound of yours with my fingers (as you commanded), without at all renewing any pain for you: But to perform such things, because it belongs only to God, hence I confess you, who have done these things, to be my God." The heavenly spirits also attested to Christ's resurrection, who said to the women: "Jesus, whom you seek, is not here; he has risen: and he will precede you into Galilee." But lest the testimony of the angels should be known to us only by the report of women: Therefore, as Christ ascended, the same (angels) addressed the astonished crowd with these words.

EEE ij

---
**Marginal Notes:**
*   **Theolo.** (next to "os quod ipsi, לוז, luz appellant")
*   **Hebræi.** (next to "Nessaman uocant")
*   **Plato.** (next to "ut Platonicis placet: in quod corpus hoc")
*   **Paulus.** (next to "secundum Apostoli sentẽtiam transmutabitur. Nec enim")
*   **Idem.** (next to "resurget (ut Apostolus ait)")
*   **Idem.** (next to "ut Paulus refert, & multis, qui aderant, quando cælum non sine intuẽ")
*   **Thon.** (next to "Hinc ille Thomæ clamor maxima ra")

--- Page 945 ---
**THE THIRD CANTICLE**

“Men of Galilee, why do you marvel, looking up into heaven? This Jesus, who was taken up from you into heaven, will so come in the flesh, or in a body already glorified, to judge the world, and to give you the same glory, just as you saw Him ascend into heaven, already glorified.” Which, along with other deeds performed by Christ, the Apostles attesting, as they had seen, proved it not only with words, but with many miracles, and finally with the peril of their lives. And to remove all suspicion of rashness and fraud, which could be ascribed to the Apostles from this testimony, Paul [marginal note: Paul] wisely argued, saying: “Unless Christ had risen, and had provided us access to resurrection, we would be more miserable than all other creatures, who enjoy their fitting pleasures.” For just as brute animals, so the unbelieving man shamefully indulges his lower appetite; but a true Christian abstains from all such things, so that he may enjoy those good things which are prepared for the blessed soul, either separated from the body, or endowed with a better lot along with it. Hence, deservedly, the Apostles and all evangelical men, who abstain from all pleasures so that they may receive that incorruptible crown, unless they were to obtain that very thing promised after the resurrection, to be most fully enjoyed by the whole person, would truly be more miserable than all other creatures, who at least enjoy some pleasure. Nor does this truth lack strength, which is embraced by all who are not depraved, is asserted by every law, is expected by all, unless there are some so defiled by such great and many crimes, that they persuade themselves of no future life, no tribunal, no judge for such great crimes. For horrible crimes (as Hierocles [marginal note: Hierocl.] says) take away all faith, all God, and finally all judge, from the minds of the blinded. By every law, I say, the resurrection [marginal note: Mahum.] is asserted, since not only the Christian [law] confesses this, but also the Muhammadan and the Hebrew [marginal note: Hebrews]. For the chief among the Hebrews, who were called Pharisees, that is, separated and removed from the common crowd, asserted this beyond all doubt. Hence Paul [marginal note: Paul] did not blush to profess himself a Pharisee, and to embrace their dogma concerning the resurrection of the dead. “For I am (he says) a Pharisee, and the son of Pharisees; and concerning the resurrection I am judged.” Indeed, the Pharisees were anciently the truly religious among the Hebrews, and were called ‘separated’ from the common people, from [Hebrew text] Paraz, which means ‘he separated’, although with diminished spirit and fervor (as very often happens) they mingled with the crowds, committing things that were not right. But when Christ, the true Pharisee, and utterly separated from the world and from all that is in it, rebuked them as guilty of their profession and name, hence they rose up against the teacher of truth, which by common law begets hatred. Those therefore among the Hebrews themselves who think well, profess the resurrection, await the world to come, and celebrate it in many volumes, greatly esteeming those who have diligent care for the coming age. Nor will I bring forward what Muhammad asserts about the resurrection in his theology, since he received by theft every truth he professes from the Mosaic or evangelical law. Nevertheless, I considered it opportune to bring up his sect, since at present the entire human race is divided into these three principal sects: Hebraic-

--- Page 946 ---
**SEVENTH POINT.**                                **403**

Christian, and Mahumetan, so that all may understand that there is no religion or dogma that does not profess and teach this truth about the resurrection.

        **Whether the future resurrection can be proven by reasons.        Chapter III.**

[Large decorated initial E] ND although (according to Plato) divine things are to be received by oracles rather than investigated by intellect or proven by reasons, nevertheless, since the oracles themselves are such that they teach nothing absurd, nothing not consonant with nature, I judge it not unfitting to thoroughly examine the agreement of these divinely revealed things with our reason and intellect: which kind of knowledge is most elegant in my view, namely when something is in harmony with the intellect, which feeds on truth alone and delights in it, provided it is purified. For a darkened intellect cannot receive the light of truth, as John says: 'And the darkness did not comprehend it.' Therefore, acting with purified minds, we will propose that the soul is immortal, as not only laws assert, but all true wise men profess; and reason persuades that it should indeed attain that end which it can in no way achieve in this earthly pilgrimage, as the Apostle wisely says: 'As long as we are in this body, we are pilgrims from the Lord.' Moreover, the soul is a partaker of divine and eternal light, just like an angel: For God himself (as John says) was the true light, which enlightens every man: that light, indeed, which is the Word and the splendor of the Father: to which even angels (as Augustine says) approach, as to the fount of life. And (to proceed further) everyone who is a partaker of something, perceives the nature of that of which he is a partaker. For the eye, capable of this sensible light, is considered to be of the same nature, even if some see less, and some more, and some more acutely, and others more obtusely. It is no different with hearing and other faculties. Therefore, man will not be alien from the nature of the angel and of God, since all (though in different degrees) enjoy the same light. And since they are incorruptible and immortal, without doubt the soul will also be immortal, since it has communion with them: this especially, because the soul itself immediately draws its origin, together with the angel, from that immutable and perpetual parent, who whatever he produced immediately and without other aid, undoubtedly brought forth as eternal: as Plato teaches, and Plotinus confirms. For he produced heaven, earth, which stands eternally, man as to the soul, and great dragons immediately, and without the aid of a second cause, or presupposed matter: all of which are perpetual and permanent. Nor do I understand by these dragons, those creeping upon the earth, but both angels, good and bad: as some more recondite theologians not unfittingly interpret, as we have said elsewhere. Nor does that saying of the highest Truth stand in the way: 'Heaven and earth will pass away': because that passing away will be according to some effect: or it will be a transformation into a better state, without its destruction. By the same law, the ideas of things, or universals (if they truly exist) are eternal: because immediately, and without any
Plato:
Ioan:
Paulus
Ioan:
August:
Plato:
Plotinus
Theolo:
CHRISTUS.
                                                                EEE iij

--- Page 947 ---
CANTICI TERTII

With the cause having been brought forth, this soul is therefore immortal and perpetual, so that it may perpetually enjoy the eternal God and be a partaker of Him. From whose fellowship, a wanderer, even if it sometimes falls away through negligence and does not fully and purely receive Him, yet it has within itself certain seeds, from which, with the favor of that supernal sun, it can repair and recall its suppressed powers, until it attains His perfect likeness, image, and complete union. Since, as a wanderer and clothed in this heavy mass, it cannot do these things perfectly, it is necessary that its body be transformed, configured to the body of glory of Him who gave beginning to resurrection and life, so that it may enjoy His full fellowship. For the transformed body will become, like a seed into a living plant, a companion and vehicle of that prince of blessedness, just as He Himself became living bread and was presented to us as food. And this is that [Marginal note: Apocal.] mutual banquet, about which He, both food and guest, speaks in the Apocalypse, saying: "I will sup with him, and he with me." For He will indeed eat me, the living bread, and the hidden manna, by which He will be continuously sustained. But I will delight in him, marked with a better life and made like unto me, to whom I, who am the resurrection and the life, will continuously grant that better life.

Nor is it necessary for us to labor here in bringing forth sentences from sacred scripture, since the same faith ought to be given to one as to many, as any one of them emanates from the face of unmixed and infallible truth. Paul, [Marginal note: Paulus.] who saw the mysteries of God and in whose breast Christ resonates, brings forth these things, taught by the master and in the gymnasium of truth: "Behold, I tell you a mystery: We shall all indeed rise in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will rise incorruptible. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality." Behold how clearly he reveals the mystery and manner of the resurrection, with which all agree who have been taught in the same academy.

Nor are there wanting those who suggest that the resurrection can be proven from the stars, if it could be shown that the aspects and places of the planets are the same as when the world was created, and that those surfaces upon which the stars revolve are not incommensurable, like the diameter of a square to its side, but symmetrical, so that all things might at last converge as they were. Which, however, is nothing, since the universal resurrection of the dead does not require the exact same condition of the stars that the world held when it was first created, because human bodies were not fabricated then, nor was the union of souls with them made; but (this happened) in many and successive courses of years. Hence, this truth about the resurrection is to be sought only from Him who will bring it about at will, and who gave to man the means by which he can rise again, just as He gave to plants and certain animals the means by which (as we have said) they are renewed in their seasons. From these things alone (beyond what the oracles say) can we conjecture about the resurrection.

--- Page 948 ---
VOLUME SEVEN. 404

Who first gave access to the resurrection, and how fittingly. Chapter 54.

Who indeed gave the beginning to this true resurrection, and access to it for us, is not to be doubted in the least, as Paul's truthful trumpet of the highest prince resounds: [Marginal note: Paulus] "Christ has risen from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep; for since by man came death, by man also came the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ all will be made alive." And again: "The first man became a living soul," which is also granted to other living beings. "But the second man became a life-giving spirit," which is granted to man alone by the grace of God, through Him who provided the beginning of the resurrection: [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] as He Himself expresses in the Gospel which is titled according to John, saying: "This is the will of the Father who sent Me, that of all He has given Me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day." And again: [Marginal note: Idem.] "This is the will of Him who sent Me, that everyone who sees the Son and believes in Him may have eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day."

Indeed, it is fitting that man should be restored by Him through whom he was instituted; and just as through the lower man he had descended into death, so through the higher man he should rise to life. For concerning the earthly man it was said: "The Lord God created man from the dust of the earth"; and thence it is inferred: "Dust you are, and to dust you shall return," until, that is, you rise adorned with a better lot. But at the generation of the second man, Gabriel, His angel, who was the maker of both men, said to the mother of the second man, soon to be: "The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you." Hence you will conceive and bear a son, not indeed earthly, as the former was, but heavenly, divine, and the savior of the former and of all human offspring. From this the messenger added: "He will save His people" (whom, namely, He will regenerate by a new generation) "from their sins," and consequently from the death which they had contracted therefrom.

From the earthly man, therefore, we have the means by which we return with him to the earth from which he was taken; but from the heavenly man, the means by which we are led back to heaven, from which He Himself descended, to lead us there. Since this cannot happen with this garment subject to corruption, it is necessary that, having laid it aside, we put on the incorruptible, according to that saying of the Apostle: [Marginal note: Paul] "But when this mortal will have put on immortality, and this corruptible will have put on incorruption, then will come to pass (as is subjoined) the saying that is written: 'Death is swallowed up in victory.'" For death, indeed, not only that which is our dissolution and the separation of the soul from the body, but also the very angel of death, who is called death, especially in this place: whose power and strength will be utterly swallowed up, when, having achieved victory, we shall obtain triumph in the resurrection. For then no power of the enemy will be left against us, when his instrument, which is our animal nature, will have been changed into that state which it can in no way harm. Therefore, its power will be emptied, and utterly extinguished, just as fire is extinguished when its fuel is removed. So death will be swallowed up, and its author with all its power, when we shall attain in the resurrection immortality, incorruption, and perpetual life. Which, however, having been conquered -
EEE iij

--- Page 949 ---
**THE THIRD CANTICLE**

...which victory, and which triumph, we cannot have except through Him, in whom death, who is the devil and prince of this corruptible world, has no power: indeed, just as in His first coming he was cast out by Him, lest he should be worshipped by human creation as another God, so in the second [coming] he will be utterly cast out: so that he cannot prevail against any soldier or even the least member of that true triumpher. For a most complete victory was achieved by Christ the prince, when He was lifted up from the earth, because then the prince of this world, subject to corruption and death, was cast out; then He drew all things to Himself by a certain power and most sufficient disposition: yet without the full attainment of the effect, until we are completely freed from the state of pilgrimage and struggle, and obtain the kingdom prepared for us from the foundation of the world, and acquired by the Lamb: who (as
[Marginal note: Ioan.]
John says) was slain from the origin of the world. Nor indeed was the world and the human race to be restored by another, except by Him through whom it had been
[Marginal note: CHRISTVS.]
instituted: For all things were made through the Word: and all things were restored through the Word. Hence that voice of the restorer: Without me you can do nothing.

What we have revealed from the sacred scriptures concerning this resurrection. Chapter V.

<span style="font-size: 200%; line-height: 1em;">S</span>ed all these things, since they transcend all human comprehension, nor can we have full faith concerning them, unless we are taught, as is customary, by divine oracles (which frequently assert these same things). I know (says Job) that my redeemer lives, and in the last day I shall rise from the earth,
[Marginal note: Iob.]
and again I shall be clothed with my skin, and in my flesh I shall see God my savior: Indeed, not in this corruptible flesh, but in flesh transformed for the better.
[Marginal note: Martha.]
Likewise, Martha, now made a theologian by the best Teacher (as John relates), asserts, saying: I know that my brother will rise again on the last day.
[Marginal note: Paulus]
Paul, addressing both the Thessalonians and Corinthians, explains the truth of the matter in a long discourse, and strives to prove it, and reveals the manner with wondrous mysteries, saying: It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body: it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption: and other things which are
[Marginal note: CHRISTVS.]
commemorated there. Which Christ had also taught before in the gospel, which is titled according to Luke, when He says: In the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but men will be like the angels of God, namely, incorruptible, agile, noble, spiritual, and adorned with triumph: so that they no longer succumb, indeed they will be made both angels and sons of God according to the power given to them, as John testifies.
[Marginal note: Ioan.]
Therefore, not without reason, nor without mystery, does the supreme Teacher assert that men will be like
[Marginal note: Theolo.]
the angels of God: although more recent theologians say that they differ in species from these. But how (I ask) can those things which differ in species be assimilated? The
[Marginal note: Peripate.]
Peripatetics would say that that assimilation would be accidental, and not in a specific or essential sense.
[Marginal note: Paulus.]
Which in no way seems to be Christ's meaning, to whom even these words of the Apostle are contrary: This mortal and natural [body] shall put on immortality, and shall rise spiritual. Moreover, he teaches us by what reason we are transformed into a higher image—

--- Page 950 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 405

a superior image, which is the Son of God himself: Which transformation those who are called natural philosophers neither taught nor saw. Hence, those who thoroughly imitate the leaders of nature omit it, since this transcends the order of inferior nature by long strides. Therefore, from our Paul, we do not only have the resurrection [Marginal note: Paul] that will happen someday, but also with what gifts bodies will rise, and what condition we will attain. And going further, he explains by what power these things will happen: because at the command of God, and at the trumpet of the archangel; and also how quickly, because in the blink of an eye. Also, with what difference men will rise: because some will be changed, while others will not at all. Before what tribunal also will the resurrected stand, because it is said: When the Son of Man comes in His [Marginal note: CHRIST,] majesty, and all His angels with Him, then He will sit on the throne of His majesty, and all nations will be gathered before Him, and He will separate them from one another, just as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats: and He will place the sheep on His right, and the goats on His left. Finally, the judgment is expressed, and the reward that each one will receive according to his works, when it is said: These will go into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life. Only the time when these things will happen is declared to be hidden in the Father's breast.

If by any conjecture it can be known when this resurrection will be. Chapter VI.

[Decorative initial Q] Therefore, when this resurrection will be is very difficult to define, [Marginal note: The same.] as Christ says: It is not for you to know the times or seasons, which the Father has placed in His own power. And again in the Gospel, concerning that day or hour no one knows, neither the angels of heaven, but the Father alone. And (as Mark adds) neither the Son, but the Father alone: and to whom, of course, it is revealed by [Marginal note: Mark.] the Father Himself, in whose power it is to determine all these things. For this, and all other things, the Son confesses to have received from the Father, when He says: The Father has given all things to me. And again, [Marginal note: CHRIST,] concerning the knowledge of things, He says: My doctrine is not mine, but His who sent me, the Father's. Therefore, those who have been taught by the Father of lights can prognosticate something about that final judgment and the solemn change of things. Among whom is the Son of God Himself, who, when the Apostles questioned Him about this matter, although He did not openly state the time, nevertheless mentioned some preceding things, saying: [Marginal note: The same.] For you will first hear of wars and rumors of wars: and He adds many things that will precede them long before: among which He enumerates false prophets, who indeed presume to prophesy things which the Holy Spirit has not suggested, or who, to gain some reputation, falsely strive to persuade the common people of certain unheard-of sects and things, which are not conducive to the truth of the Gospel, nor to the unity of the spirit, nor to the bond of peace left to us by Christ in a solemn testament. Afterwards, He adds concerning the son of iniquity, who himself will precede that last day for some time, as He Himself relates, saying in the Gospel titled according to Luke: These things must first happen, but the end is not immediately. [Marginal note: The same.] Finally, He adds closer signs, saying: There will be
EEE v.

--- Page 951 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

signs in the sun, moon, and stars, and on earth distress of nations, and because of the roaring confusion of the sea and waves, men fainting from fear and expectation of what will come upon the whole world. For the powers of the heavens will be shaken, namely, to execute those things which will happen everywhere beyond all natural order. But although he mentions many things of this kind, he hints at nothing about the time, except in those words which he finally added, saying: Amen I say to you, that this generation will not pass away until all these things happen. Which word is quite obscure, since it can be understood in different ways. For instead of 'this generation', we can interpret 'human generation' (mankind): But would it not have been superfluous to say of the human race, that generation will not pass away until those things which are to be accomplished in that generation are fulfilled? Also, 'generation' is the common life of man, according to which meaning that sentence has no place at all: since the life of man from the time of the flood onwards has been confined within the space of one hundred and twenty years: and already one thousand five hundred and more years have passed since that threat. Nor can that word be interpreted concerning the great life of man, which was appointed from the beginning to be extended up to a thousand years: although no mortal has reached that limit (not without mystery), but some have come close to it, such as Adam, Methuselah: and others. Adam indeed lived nine hundred and thirty years: The other indeed nine hundred and sixty-nine: For this generation or life also fails from the time already elapsed after those words. Nor could it be understood as 'age', because 'sæculum' [Marginal note: Exo.] (age) is sometimes taken for the common span of life, as that which we read in Exodus: And he shall be a servant forever, until namely he completes the span of life. And sometimes 'sæculum' is extended up to a thousand years, beyond which limit [Marginal note: Hebræi.] (as the Hebrews assert) it can by no means be extended. Hence (if I am not mistaken), by 'this generation' the Savior understands the third part of the fluctuating course of the world. For (as we can conjecture from some not weaker passages), the labor of the human generation is completed in six thousand years: but in the seventh it will rest: Just as the supreme craftsman built the world in six days, and rested on the seventh. Nor do we inappropriately equate thousands of years with as many days, because among more profound [Marginal note: Theolo.] theologians, a thousand years is often counted as a day, according to that [Marginal note: Dauid] of the Davidic hymn: For a thousand years in your sight are like yesterday, which has passed. Also the six of labor, and the seventh of rest, both in days and in years, is corroborated by divine law. For six days of the week are granted by law for performing works: but the seventh is dedicated to rest. And again, six years being [Marginal note: Exodo.] granted for cultivating fields, in the seventh, rest is proclaimed for both the field and the cultivator, as we read in Exodus. It is not surprising, therefore, if after the human race has labored for six thousand years with various inconveniences and diverse agitations brought about by Satan, that is, the adversary, it will rest in the seventh millennium, as the beloved Apostle [Marginal note: Ioannes.] of Christ describes in the Apocalypse. And this, with Satan himself and our adversary first bound, who is the ancient serpent: so that he may not deceive, nor disturb in that blessed

--- Page 952 ---
TONVS SEPTIMVS. 406

nations in the millennium: but let men be true priests of Christ, dedicating themselves to God, so that they may now reign in that kingdom which is established within us, and which, having attained, they truly rest. But the labor which precedes this rest is threefold, distinguished by a threefold law, namely (as they say) of nature, of scripture, and of grace. The first of these times, and the first generation, directed only by the law of nature, without sacrifices and the influx of grace, was in a way barren and empty. But the second space of time, and the generation running in it, brought back something of gain and favor from the law. But in the third space, it was granted to offer full sheaves, supported by Christ's grace, to the judge himself and to God the Father. Hence that oracle of Elijah, highly revered among the Hebrews: [Marginal note: Isaias] "Two thousand empty: Two thousand under the law: Two thousand under the Messiah." But since, from a diligent calculation of the Hebrews, now, when we are living in the year calculated from the birth of Christ, one thousand five hundred twenty-third, we have from the origin of the world the five thousand two hundred eighty-fourth year, and there remain to the completion of the sixth millennium, seven hundred and sixteen years: After which we will enter into the seventh millennium of sabbath and rest. This generation, therefore, according to this kind of calculation, is of two thousand years, which are to be completed under the Messiah: in which all things predicted by Christ will be fulfilled, before we come to the great day, and the sabbatical space of a thousand years. But after that millennium [Marginal note: Ioann] of rest, Satan and our adversary will be loosed (says John) for a short time, so that he may still tempt the saints of God and test them with a final and ultimate trial. In which conflict, the ultimate victory having been achieved and a full triumph obtained, a full renewal will follow, and a perfect union of men with God, from whom they proceeded. [Marginal note: Idem] And then, the devil having been cast into the lake of fire (as John further implies), and death having been swallowed up in the full victory of Christ and His members, there will be a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth (as that divine writer continues) will pass away, and the first, turbulent sea will no longer be, because He who sat on the throne said: "Behold, I make all things new." These are the things which, from conjectures drawn from lower things, can be held concerning the determined course of the end time. I say from lower things, because also from revolutions and measurements determining lower things, which are in the archetype, the same could be conjectured: which, however, we omit, because our Latins have neither the elements of that doctrine nor its progress from them at hand.

**By whose virtue the resurrection will be brought about. Chapter VII.**

**T**herefore, the course of times having been completed, every cause and instrument will converge to bring about the renewal of things, which had been instituted by the same. For God is the Father, from whom as from the first origin, and the Son, in whom as in a solid foundation all things were skillfully made through the Spirit, the artisan of all created things: concerning whom it is said in scripture: [Marginal note: Genesis] "The Spirit of the Lord hovered over the waters," so that from them particular for-

--- Page 953 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

might bring forth into light. To bring about these things, however, the Creator assumed things already created as co-workers, or as instruments, commanding the earth that it should bring forth green herb: and the waters that they should teem, and bring forth living creatures according to their kind: And the other things which follow. Which, after the first foundations were laid, he brought forth, with certain powers intervening, through which he governs all things: and finally he will bring all these things to their proper end. Therefore, in the same order, that succession of times being completed, which the Father placed in his own power, he will command that in that word, in which he sustains all things, these same things be restored to complete perfection by the same artisan, and through the same means, through which they were brought forth from the beginning. And although the sacred scriptures seem to attest concerning man alone being resurrected, and being restored to his first, and highest parent: nevertheless if anyone carefully considers the words of the highest
[Marginal note: CHRIST] Truth, he will clearly perceive that all things are to be renewed, for it says, "Heaven and earth will pass away:" Nor (as I think) will they make any transition, except to a better state. For to pass away is not to perish: but to change place, state, or some condition. Therefore, the movable heavens will pass away to a state and rest, towards which all motion tends. And the ever-changing earth will pass away, to that state where it may receive a certain lot of the land of the living. And men, in whom all things are contained, will pass into an angelic and divine nature: so that truly that heavenly oracle, recently
[Marginal note: Apoca.] brought forth, may have its place: "Behold, I make all things new." For indeed, in the first advent of the Redeemer, the human condition had been renewed by signs, sacraments, law, worship, and all disposing means towards a perfect, complete, and evident renewal. But in the second and more glorious advent, that renewal will be consummated, by which it will appear what new sacraments, what new signs, and new rites have accomplished. Therefore, the author of this universal resurrection and renewal will be God, three and one: by whose command all these things will happen. But it will deservedly be ascribed particularly to him, who is the principle of resurrection, and who, rising first, provided the way of rising to others.
[Marginal note: Paul] But the executors will be angels, and ministers of God himself, as the Apostle openly relates, saying: "The Lord himself will descend from heaven with a shout, namely his own, and with the voice of the archangel, and with the trumpet of God." "And the dead in Christ will rise first." In like manner also Christ, from whom Paul had learned, in the gospel, which is titled
[Marginal note: Matthew] according to Matthew, explains the same, when he says: "They will see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with much power and majesty." "And he will send his angels with a trumpet, and a great voice, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from the highest heavens, to their uttermost bounds."

**What this angelic voice and trumpet of God is. Chapter VIII.**

**B**ut it must be observed, why this trumpet is called "of God" by the Apostle, and is ascribed to angels by Christ. For this is done, so that we may understand that voice, by whomever it is uttered, is brought to us by the command of God who ordains. For often we read that angels spoke in the person of-

--- Page 954 ---
TOMVS SEPTIMVS. 407

of God: so much so that that precept and word is uttered by an angel, and yet is ascribed to God. For the Law (says the Apostle) was given through angels: nevertheless, God is always introduced as commanding and ordaining. [Marginal note: Paul] And this, because the angel conveyed all those things to Moses by the command and power of God. Therefore it is said: And the Lord spoke to Moses: For an angel, always receiving influence and command from God, moves at His nod, speaks, cries out, and sounds like a trumpet: Hence, when the command of God and Christ concerning the raising of the dead is announced by angels, they will be like trumpets, conveying not only the voice, but the very power of God to raise corpses, or to clothe souls anew. Therefore, the trumpet will be angelic, because an angel will convey the voice and command: but it will be of God, who will command and blow, or give a sign through angels (as some think) or bring about some effect through them, whoever it may be. And it is rightly called a trumpet, which conveys the voice of God to the ears of men as a kind of channel. And just as trumpets, receiving breath and force from the trumpeter, rouse horses to move camps, incite men to war, and invite soldiers to receive a bounty, and to all celebrated acts of military service, so angels, receiving the voice and power together with the command from God the prince, will rouse the horses of our bodies, together with their riders, to that terrible judgment, to invade new dwellings, and to receive rewards for deeds well done.

What change of bodies is to come. Chapter IX.
**W**HEN, therefore, this trumpet sounds, the greatest change of things will occur, but especially of our bodies, as the Apostle says: "For the trumpet will sound, [Marginal note: Idem] and the dead will rise incorruptible: and we shall be changed." But to those wishing to inquire how and with what kind of body the dead will rise, the Apostle answers, saying: "You fool, who indeed do not believe, or do not understand: Do you not see how the dead will rise, and be changed? For what you sow is not quickened, unless it first dies. And observe what you sow: you do not commit to the furrows the body that will be, but a bare grain of wheat, or of some other plant: but God gives it a body as He wills: and to each seed its own body. So to each man being raised, He will give a body suitable to his state: and whatever kind of body it may be, it will be a true body (although that of the blessed will be a celestial, impassible, and glorious body, while that of the reprobate will be passible and heavy) just as both an earthly body and a celestial body are each a true body: Which bodies differ, just as the flesh of different animals, according to the Apostle's opinion, who adds: "Not [Marginal note: Idem] all flesh is the same flesh, but there is one of men, another of beasts, another of birds, and another of fish: so also celestial bodies, and terrestrial bodies: But there is indeed one glory of the celestial, and another of the terrestrial: And among celestial bodies, there is one brightness of the sun, another of the moon, and another of the stars." And again, establishing a difference among sidereal bodies, he adds: "As star differs from star in brightness, so saint from [Marginal note: Genes] saint in glory." And so that he might more clearly explain those things which he had shadowed forth by metaphors,

--- Page 955 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

he explains in plain language, adding: It is sown in corruption, it will rise in incor-
ruption: It is sown in dishonor, it will rise in glory: It is sown in weakness,
it will rise in power: Finally, an animal body is sown, a spiritual body will rise:
so that we may always be conformed to the eternal Father. For the first man was made into a living
soul: The last man into a life-giving spirit: although this heavenly one, in order to lead that earthly one into the heavenly, assumed an earthly and passible body: according
to which he suffered, died, and was buried. After which he rose impassible, heavenly,
and spiritual, having now become the second parent: to whom it is necessary that we also
[Marginal note: Paulus.] be made conformable in body, if we are to reign with him, as the Apostle adds. Therefore, just
as we have borne the image of the earthly, let us also bear the image of the heavenly. And so
Paul determines this transformation to be necessary, that he declares the opposite impossible, saying:
But this I say, and proclaim: that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God, nor will corruption inherit incorruption: this flesh, of course, is
corruptible, mortal, and passible: but especially subject to sin, and
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] to the tempter. Hence he most clearly concludes that this flesh must be transformed into another,
adorned namely with a heavenly and spiritual nature. But those words which
Christ uttered about himself when risen seem to greatly object, saying: Handle me, and
see; for a spirit does not have flesh and bones as you see me have: Which would
have been nothing, unless his risen body had palpable flesh and bones: It is true,
I say: but incorruptible flesh, and bones that cannot be diminished, yet a body palpable
and visible at will: For he entered to the eleven disciples with the doors
closed, which could by no means have happened, unless that body had been able to be attenuated at will,
like wind and spirit. Nor otherwise, while he was with men for
forty days after the resurrection, did he now show himself visible and palpable,
now did he flee human touch and gaze. Again, he can present himself as
large and small at will, and without any circumscription of place, as happens in the sa-
crament of the altar: which all wise men approve: although some think it happens
by a miracle, with the respect of the parts to the place removed, yet with the
relation of the same parts to the whole remaining: But (unless I am mistaken) this happens from the nature of the spirit
into which he was transformed when rising. Therefore, the change of these corruptible
bodies will be into the nature of heavenly bodies, and spirits.

Who are to be changed, and who not, and why. Chapter X.

[Marginal note: Paulus.] [Large decorative initial S] Now, whether all will be changed, or not, is not to be doubted in the least, since
we have the heavenly trumpet openly proclaiming it: Indeed,
we shall all rise, but not all shall be changed. For those will be changed into
a heavenly nature who, trampling down corporeal and earthly things, lived
heavenly lives: and who are to possess the heavenly regions. But the others, who willingly
submitting themselves to the earth and the dregs of the earth, have been enslaved to infernal
and Tartarean regions, are to be thrust down into the lowest center of the machine: if they
will retain flesh and an earthly body conformable to their dwelling, yet freed from further dissolution, so that

--- Page 956 ---
TONE SEVENTH. 408

...deprived of perpetual light and the grace of God, and always turned away from God, they may be tormented in dark fire perpetually, according to the Emperor's edict, now promulgated by him: "Go, accursed ones, into eternal fire." Therefore, only those will be changed into a better state who, raised beyond men, will attain the condition of the Gods and the fellowship of the supreme craftsman himself: which, clothed in this corruptible garment, they cannot achieve. For by this law, war was declared upon us from the beginning between flesh and spirit, and between body and soul: so that whoever conquered would endow the vanquished with their own laws. For if the flesh, or the animal body, conquers, it imparts heaviness to the spirit and rational soul, so that it descends to the lowest parts of the world. It also envelops it in darkness, so that it can no longer perceive that divine light in whose splendor well-instructed souls rejoice. Moreover, it renders that soul capable of suffering, which by itself could not be sad, just as it could not weave or spin: so much so that it suffers even from corporeal fire. Finally, it provides grossness with its weight, so that it can in no way depart from the infernal dwellings, but, enslaved by perpetual chains and prisons, always with the heaviest weight prepared by its own crimes, it lies perpetually in the lowest part of the world. But if the spirit prevails, it will bestow its own laws, and these better ones (which theologians [Marginal note: Theologians] call "gifts" or "endowments") upon our inferior part, according to that Apostolic saying [Marginal note: Paul]: "When this mortal shall have put on immortality, and this corruptible shall have put on incorruption." To which immortality follow agility, subtlety, clarity, and all the endowments which they attribute to glorious bodies: which bodies are said to "put on" by an accommodated term. For just as our body puts on a garment of another nature to cover its nakedness and defend itself from cold, in a similar way, the body itself clothes itself in the condition of another and better nature, so that, immune from all labor and passions, it may always rejoice in a better lot. Therefore, the body will be made agile and light, so that it can easily ascend to the highest heaven. It will be subtle, so that it can penetrate all things. It will be lucid and shining like a spark, indeed like a star, so that it may be a worthy inhabitant of the region of light and splendor. It will also be impassible, so that it may feel nothing that impedes blessedness and that full joy. Finally, it will be immortal, so that it may always enjoy those eternal joys.

**With what flesh, and with what body, the sleeping are to be raised. Chapter XI.**

[Large decorative initial E containing a figure] And although we have touched upon many things concerning the transmutation of our body, and in what condition it will rise again, nevertheless, satisfaction must be given to some who subtly inquire whether it will be this same body, and with the same form after the resurrection, which we use in this pilgrimage. For Jerome and Rufinus of Aquileia, discussing this matter, say [Marginal note: Jerome, Rufinus] that for each soul, not a confused or alien body, but its own, which it had, will be restored, so that consequently, for the struggles of the present life, its flesh, either chaste, may be crowned with its soul, or unchaste, may be punished. For a greater expression of this matter, Rufinus says [Marginal note: The Same] that by the church itself, where the resurrection of the flesh is commonly held in the creed, there was added "the resurrection of *his* flesh, or *their* flesh": undoubtedly *his* flesh which he who professes it has, with the sign of the cross imposed on his forehead.

--- Page 957 ---
CANTICI TERTII

Others, however, on the contrary, cry out and say: How can flesh, which, having putrefied, dis-
solves, or is turned into dust, and even absorbed into the deep sea, and scattered by the waves,
be gathered again, and joined together into one, and a human body be restored from it?
How again can the same flesh, which is now corruptible and dissolvable,
immediately or after some time be incorruptible, immortal, and entirely free from all
change: when corruptible and incorruptible (as they say) differ more than in kind?
The first of these is easily solved, if one looks to the majesty of the supreme creator and ruler.
For divine power is not so limited and weak, that it cannot gather the scattered dust of each flesh into its proper form, and restore it:
when we see mortal ingenuity exploring veins of metals submerged deep in the earth,
where the eye of the diligent artisan sees gold, which the unskillful considers earth.
Why then should we hesitate to grant these things to Him who made man, when he who
was made by Him can achieve so much? And when mortal ingenuity discovers that there is a proper vein for gold, and another for silver, and one for bronze also far different, and a diverse one for iron and lead, lying hidden within the species of earth, shall not divine power be thought able to find and discern the proper essence of each flesh, and gather it into one, if it appears scattered, by the power of its own fire, just as miners gather the very smallest particles of metals themselves with this common fire which we use?
As for what is objected secondly, whether the form of the incorruptible body, and already converted into the nature of spirit, will be the same as that corruptible one which it has here, we ought not easily assert that: since the form subject to corruption does not appear to be the same as that which is entirely free from all change: This is especially so,
[Marginal note: Paulus] as the Apostle says: "We await the Savior, our Lord JESUS Christ, who will transform the body of our lowliness, conforming it to the body of His glory."
By these words (if one rightly understands), the Apostle implies another form, and another figure of the body to be resumed by those who are raised, just as he says again: "because we shall be changed, because a spiritual body will arise, because this corruptible [body] will put on incorruption, and because from the sown body there will be a new sprouting." For one is the form of the sown grain, another of that which sprouts: For that dies, and remains dead in the earth: But this revives and lives. The body also, which will rise, will assume a life that will always endure.
Therefore we shall be raised in flesh and body, which sprouts from that which dies, perhaps in a better state than that which dies, as the Apostle says again. "Christ has risen from the dead, He dies no more; death will no longer have dominion over Him." So that we may
[Marginal note: Iob.] follow Him, our bodies will rise with the same endowments. Nor does that passage from Job hinder, where he says: "Again I shall be clothed with my skin, and in my flesh I shall see God my savior." For even if it will be different, it will still be that of the one rising, so that each one can say: "This is my flesh, and my skin."

Which hair will not perish. Chapter XII.
[Large decorative initial S] But since sacred scripture makes mention of hairs, something must also be discussed concerning them. For Christ says: "All the hairs of your head are numbered." Concerning these words, Jerome says: "They mock understanding-"

--- Page 958 ---
**SEVENTH TONE. 409**

...ecclesiastical understanding in this place, which denies the resurrection of the flesh: as if we say that all hairs which are numbered and cut by the barber will rise again, since the Savior did not say: 'All the hairs of your head are to be saved,' but 'are numbered.' Where there is a number, the knowledge of the number is demonstrated, not the preservation of the same number. By these words, Jerome seems to refute that we will resume our hairs again. But what shall we say to that which is found in the Gospel, whose title is according to Luke: 'A hair of your head shall not perish'? Therefore (unless I am mistaken), Christ does not speak of these hairs which are cut off and wasted or burned by fire, but of better hairs, which are commended in the Nazirites and are forbidden to be cut. In these was the power of the Holy Spirit, for casting down foreigners, as Origen rightly understands. For these hairs are the virtues of the soul, and manifold senses, which were produced from the nobler part of the mind, from the head of the Apostles. Hence, for Nazirites and others familiar with God, not only was cutting forbidden: but also that no razor should come upon their head: as we read of Samuel, Samson, and others: because the thoughts of the righteous are not to be cut off, but to be preserved. For whatever the righteous do, prospers, and their leaf does not fall. But every work, every word, and every thought of sinners, as evil, ought to be cut off and removed. Hence in Deuteronomy it is commanded: that if any woman from among foreigners, that is, captive by gentile errors, is led [to be married], she should shave her head: or, as the literal truth has it, she should shave the hair of her head and cut her nails: so that nothing of gentility or error may remain in her who is joined with a true Israelite. In Isaiah also, after the prophet prophesied concerning the conception and birth of the virgin, it is added: 'In that day the Lord will shave with a hired razor, from those who are beyond the river, by the king of the Assyrians, the head, and the hair of the feet, and the whole beard,' openly signifying that in the time of the Messiah, all things that were of idolatry and error ought to be cut off in the Gentiles coming to the faith. And this with a hired razor, that is, by the merit of the Redeemer: by which all things that are of sin and error were shaved away. Therefore, the hairs of sinners and those who err are to be shaved. But those of the righteous and Nazirites are to be preserved: according to that which is mysteriously written in the Canticles: 'The locks of your head are like royal purple, joined to channels.' For what it had said before, 'your head is like Carmel,' it now says, 'the locks of your head are like purple.' For this [purple] is born from a worm, which is called *chermel*: whence it is sometimes used for purple: just as we read in the second volume of Paralipomenon (Chronicles): when Solomon sent to Hiram, king of Tyre, to send him a skilled man who knew how to work in gold, silver, bronze, iron, and purple: For which in Hebrew is found כרמיל *charmil*. For it does not speak here of Mount Carmel, nor of the worm generating purple: but of purple itself, which by its proper name in Hebrew is called ארגמן *argaman*. Therefore, it means that the locks, that is, thoughts and works, should be like royal purple, enriched and shining with grace and the merit of our supreme king, our redeemer. So that these may be fruitful, it is necessary that they be joined to those heavenly channels flowing from that all-irrigating fount, from which...

FFF

[Marginal notes: Orige, Deuter, Isaias, Cantica, Paralip]

--- Page 959 ---
**Transcription:**

de quo
superius diximus. De canalibus autem, quibus capilli iunguntur, in eodem loco
dicitur: Nares tuæ sicut turris Libani, quæ respicit contra Damascum. Nares
enim sunt organa odoratus, per quæ uita inspiratur, & uentus, id est spiritus
perflatur. Turris autem Libani, est templum Salomonis, quod de cedris Libani
constructum est. Quæ turris respicit contra Damascum, id est, contra Syros,
qui Damasci habitabant, & erant inimici populi Dei. Sic igitur, sicut turris
Libani respicit contra Damascum, ita & nos debemus respicere contra inimicos
nostros, & contra omnes, qui nos impugnant. Et sicut turris Libani erat alta,
& fortis, ita & nos debemus esse alti, & fortes in fide, & in operibus bonis.
Et sicut turris Libani erat ornata, & pulchra, ita & nos debemus esse ornati,
& pulchri in uirtutibus, & in gratia Dei. Et sicut turris Libani erat plena
thesauris, ita & nos debemus esse pleni thesauris bonorum operum, & meritorum.
Et sicut turris Libani erat locus refugii, ita & nos debemus esse locus refugii
proxim

--- Page 960 ---
TONVS SEPTIMVS.                                 410
by the charity of those gathered, just as Christ wished to imply (Paul and Augustine [Marginal note: CHRI STVS. Paulus. Augusti.]
interpreting), when He gave us His body, a great sign of charity, under the species of bread,
for food: so that from it He might not only bind us together mutually, but also unite us with
Himself. Which food of charity, the best of all, ought to be fortified by fragrant roses, [Marginal note: Paulus.]
through which our interpretation has lilies, so that we may be able to say with the Apostle, "We are the good odor
of Christ." And the hands, that is, the virtues of working, will be golden, filled namely with that cha-
rity, with which the feet of affections (are filled); and they (the hands/virtues) full of hyacinths, that is, the gems of Christ's
merit, without which our works are worth nothing. But the throat, that is, the organ for expressing
thought, will be most sweet, so that it may always render harmonious praises to God. The neck
like the tower of David built with battlements; I say, the tower of David, not indeed
built of bricks, or living stones, or marble, since that most holy king, and true type,
and peculiar progenitor of the Messiah, to whom a peculiar promise was made concerning him (the Messiah),
never considered such things; but he (David) was his (God's) tower, and refuge, and [Marginal note: Dauid]
bulwark: concerning whom he often repeats in the psalms, saying: "God is our refuge
and strength"; And again: "The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my
deliverer"; And again: "My protector, and the horn of my salvation."
And this is what follows: "A thousand shields hang from it," for which in Hebrew
it is אלף המגן תלוי עליו Aleph hamagen talui alav; which, interpreted,
says: "A thousand, or aleph, a shield hangs upon it." Aleph indeed signifies one and
a thousand, and it signifies God, who is the beginning and end of numbers, so that the
meaning may be: God is the shield hanging and impending over that tower itself, so that He may protect
and defend it. From which it is badly translated, "hang from it," for God does not depend on
another, but on Himself, who is the true shield, most perfectly pro-
tecting all who hope in Him; from which it follows, that He is all the armor of the strong. But the nose will be like
the tower of Lebanon, which looks towards Damascus. For the nose is understood the vigor of the spirit, and a good
impulse of anger, which ought to be upright and strong, like a tower, and ought to look
not against God, or neighbor, or any good, but against Da-
mascus, which is interpreted as "drinking blood," "kiss of blood," and "offering blood."
And these things (if I am not mistaken) signify nothing else but the kingdom of the world, of the
flesh, and of blood, with its most wicked troops, which are the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life: For who is "drinking blood" but the avaricious person,
who avoids the secondary blood (i.e., sustenance) of the poor, the lowly, and the orphans?
And what is "kiss of blood" but the lust of the flesh, where there will be mutual kisses and embraces
according to flesh and blood? And what is "offering blood" but pride,
arrogance, and ambition, for the fulfillment of which such immense blood is daily shed?
Against which evil works there ought to be indignation and zeal, so that it may be said with Christ: [Marginal note: CHRI STVS. Paulus. Ioan.]
"I bear witness concerning the world, that its works are evil." And again with Paul: "To me the world
has been crucified, and I to the world." Otherwise, unless one rises up against the world,
but wishes to be its friend (as John testifies), he will be constituted an enemy of God.
Finally, the eyes will be of doves, concerning—
                                                FFF ij

--- Page 961 ---
**THE THIRD CANTICLE**

CHRI-	...due simplicity, namely, filled with simplicity, according to that Gospel saying: "If your eye is simple, your whole body will be luminous," because every work is built upon intention, just as a column upon its base, and a wall upon its foundation. These, therefore, are the future members of our body, to be changed into the nature of spirit, according to which it will use the members and organs not of the inner, but of the outer man.
STUS.
		
		By what fire the good are to be refined.		Chapter 14.
	[Decorative initial A] We have already revealed above that a manifold fire is found, or the same fire distributed with a different character, and varied in different things, as Cleanthes discusses in a long series in Cicero.
Cleanthes.	...series in Cicero discusses. For there is this adventitious fire, which we use;
	Cicero	and there is in stones, which we strike out by the impact and conflict of steel; there is also in the earth, which smokes from digging, and heats water in deep wells, especially in winter times for this reason, because it contains innate heat in the earth. In like manner, it is proven that heat is mixed with waters...

--- Page 962 ---
TONVS SEPTIMVS. 411

But more brightly shone and burned that true light, of which John, in recompense for testimony, says: "He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire:" Therefore, with that fire, of which through Zechariah it says: "I will be to them a wall of fire all around:" A fire, indeed, either purifying, or punishing, or transforming. For it punishes the wicked with a constricted, tormenting fire, by no means illuminating or consuming. Hence, those who are tormented by that fire are said to dwell in darkness. And this, if the dogma of the Pythagoreans is true, [Marginal note: Pytha.] namely, that there is one fire everywhere: In heaven, expanded and illuminating: But in hell, constricted, dark, and tormenting: While in the midst of the whole universe, it partakes of both. It also purifies, if anyone is defiled by some dross, as it is said in Isaiah, "I will purely purge away your dross." And Malachi, "He will purify the sons of Levi." [Marginal note: Isaias. Malac.] For a soul dissolved, or destroyed by the wound of sin, unless it has been lamented, is bound up by an antidote, consolidated, and restored to health, either by the very revolution of harmony, as Plato asserts at the end of Timaeus: [Marginal note: Plato.] Or by the application of fires, according to the Apostle who says: "He will be saved, as if passing through fire," [Marginal note: Paulus.] according to that which we read figuratively in the book of Numbers. "Everything that can pass through the flames, shall be purified by fire." For the discourse was about the vessels of the tabernacle, which prefigured those vessels, of which the Apostle says: "In a great house of God there are not only vessels of gold or silver, but also fiery and earthenware." [Marginal note: Idem.] And again with the Thessalonians: "Let each one know how to possess his own vessel in sanctification and honor." But that fire transforms the purified. Therefore, in Deuteronomy it is said: "God is an eating fire:" for which we have "consuming." For he does not consume and destroy friends: but he "eats," that is, he takes them into himself, and transforms them into himself as food. Which Plutarch also testifies (as he had gathered from various ancient sources) [Marginal note: Plutarc.] saying: "God is an intellectual fiery spirit, having no form: but transforming into himself whatever he wishes, and making himself equal to all things, and all things to himself." And he accomplishes this not through elemental fire, but through himself, or through a seraphic burning close to the divine fire itself.

By what peculiar fire the wicked are to be burned. Cap. XV.

[Large decorative initial M] Therefore, that the wicked are tormented by fire, and are to be tormented, almost all confess and agree with the Supreme Truth saying: [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] "Every tree that does not bear good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire, and it burns, indeed, with that fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels." For that fire is not ordained by God for our destruction: Nor will anyone be tormented by it, unless he himself has kindled it: as we can learn from the oracle of Isaiah saying: [Marginal note: Isaias.] "Walk in the light of your fire, and in the flame which you have kindled: This has been done for you by my hand, you shall lie down in sorrows." The prophet touches on both: that it is accomplished by God, and that we ourselves kindle that fire. For although it is prepared by God, nevertheless no one will be tormented by it, unless he himself kindles it with the fuel of sins: as Origen rightly believes. [Marginal note: Orige.] For just as we kindle fiery fevers in the body with harmful foods and immoderate labors, so shall we kindle them in the soul and in the body-

FFF iij

--- Page 963 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

we will receive (when they are united) fiery torments, from the superfluity of evil works, and crooked affections: whose abundance, gathered in man, in its own time, boils up to the punishment and penalty of those who ignited it. And thus (as we follow the dogma of Pythagoras) that fire which, expanded and illuminating, beatifies him who
[Marginal note: Pythag.] has a heart expanded in the way of God's commandments: so too, fire constrained by the evil disposition of those who have a constrained heart, and hardened to good like a stone, and an anvil of a smith, and a darkened effect (for they themselves, darkened by the immense wickedness of their crimes, cannot receive divine light) becomes obscure and tormenting: just as the same sun or fire hardens or liquefies according to the variety of subjects receiving that light and heat. This doctrine concerning the same fire, beatifying and tormenting, is not alien to the sacred scriptures. Since that fire, which in Deuter-
[Marginal note: Deuter.] onomy is called consuming: and consequently beatifying and transforming, and which
[Marginal note: Exo.] in Exodus gave the fiery law in a visible flame, and which makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a burning fire, is in Isaiah called a reproving, judging,
[Marginal note: Isaias.] and punishing flame: For the prophet says: "Behold, the Lord will come in fire: and like a whirlwind his chariots, or his tribunal, to render his fury in indignation or burning rage, and his rebuke in a flame of fire: for in fire the Lord himself will judge:" Which fire he prepared for the just and orderly from the foundation of the world for splendor, joy, and gladness: But he prepared it for the wicked for torment and punishment, as their crimes and evil disposition, induced by the multitude and immensity of their sins, demand. This beatifying fire will be perpetual: but the purging fire will be extinguished in a short and appointed time. But the tormenting fire will also be eternal: as we have not only
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] from the word of the supreme Judge saying: "Depart, you cursed, into everlasting fire:" But from the prophecy
[Marginal note: Isaias.] of Isaiah, who, while speaking of the corpses of those who gravely transgressed against God, says: "Their worm shall not die: and their fire shall not be quenched." By these words, the prophet refers to both torments of the damned, namely the intrinsic and the extrinsic, as being perpetual.

How the wicked are to be tormented. Chapter XVI.

[Decorative initial S] But since we have said enough about the tormenting fire, we must also consider how the wicked will be tormented by that fire. This presents no small difficulty, presupposing that fire to be corporeal (as is the common opinion) and our souls, and evil intelligences, to be entirely separated from the body. And this topic appears all the more difficult to us, the more numerous and varied are its critics. For Gregory, quickly dispatching the matter, considers that fire
[Marginal note: Grego.] to torment the wicked as an instrument of divine justice: But how it is an instrument, and whether it inflicts torment by its own form, or is guided by another like a saw or a hammer, for the cutting or striking of the wicked, he left this to be explained by posterity. But it is to be wondered how Gregory hesitated in such a matter, when elsewhere he asserts that angels and demons have bodies: but so subtle that, in comparison to our bodies, they are said to be incorporeal. Hence, concerning this matter, this

--- Page 964 ---
**SEVENTH TONE.**

**S**&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But since we have said enough about the tormenting fire, it must also be examined how the wicked will be tormented by that fire. This brings no small difficulty, by presupposing that fire to be corporeal (as is the common opinion) and that our souls, and evil intelligences, are entirely separated from the body. And this topic presents itself to us as more difficult, as it has more and varied critics. For Gregory, quickly dispatching himself, considers that fire [Marginal note: GREGORY.] to torment the wicked as an instrument of divine justice: But how it is an instrument, and whether it inflicts torment by its own nature, or whether it is guided by another like a saw or hammer, for the cutting or striking of the wicked, he left this to be explained by posterity. Indeed, it is to be wondered how Gregory hesitated in such a matter, when elsewhere he asserts that angels and demons have bodies: but bodies so subtle, that in comparison to our bodies they are called incorporeal. Hence concerning this matter, these...

--- Page 965 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

The Lord says to the pious: Behold how the prophet describes the punishments of the wicked following from disorder and the deprivation of peace, which is the tranquility of order in things. Therefore, the soul, not feeling the coherence of rational movements to be in harmony with itself, must necessarily endure punishment and torment: and let it feel the penalty of its own discord, inconstancy, and disorder. Also, those authors whom we mentioned above describe another kind of torment: which is generated from an evil idol. For our mind, or soul, receiving into memory those things of which it expressed certain signs and forms within itself when it sinned, will see a certain history of its crimes laid open before its eyes. And then conscience itself will be agitated by its own goads, with its thoughts mutually accusing each other (as the Apostle says): From which certain torments will be generated from these very worst affections: From which also the flame of an evil conflagration, and of perverse love, and of indignation against itself, or it will be tormented by the fires of envy/malice: or by insane sadness
[Marginal note: Paul.]

--- Page 966 ---
TONE SEVEN. 413

Injuries: Or by withdrawing from them the benevolent influence, from which all things are filled with goodness, and abandoning them in their evil disorder without any good refreshing agent. And thus He Himself, who is for the well-disposed unto resurrection and joy, is for those who are ill-disposed unto ruin and punishment. And this is what Ezekiel [Ezechie.] reports having seen the Lord, namely, from the loins upward in the appearance of shining amber: but from the loins downward in the figure of burning fire. That Lord, indeed, is He who, filling heaven and earth, sits in heaven, gladdening the good: But on earth (which is the footstool of His feet), holding feet of burning fire, He torments and afflicts earthly people and those alienated from heavenly things. And unless sacred scripture taught me this, I would by no means presume to declare it, that the same Lord is now light and a beatifying fire, and making the just shine like stars, and like sparks of fire: Now therefore He is a refining fire, and purifying the sons of Levi: But now He is a fire consuming wood and stubble: which we have badly built: and devours and destroys (as Joel [Ioël.] says) the beautiful things of the desert, that is, whatever works which seem glorious, perpetrated by those who are deserted by grace and heavenly influence: And now He is a tormenting and burning fire. Hence again Joel [Idem.] says: "Before His face is a devouring fire: and behind Him a burning flame." The meaning of these words is: He Himself, for those who are worthy to see His face, is a fire consuming and transforming into Himself: as we touched upon above: But for those who are abandoned to the delight of posterior, that is, lower affections, He is a burning and tormenting flame, either by Himself (although in Himself He is most excellent) just as it happens to any ill-disposed persons, for whom light, wine, meat, and similar bodily goods are harmful. Or He does this through ministers, whom He makes (as the prophet [Dauid] testifies) a burning fire, but for the good unto joy, and for the wicked unto torment. Or likewise He does it through something corporeal fashioned for the torture of the wicked: so that it may satisfy those who contend that that fire is corporeal. But whether it is corporeal or not, God knows: but it is well proven to be invisible by Origen [Orige.] from the Apostolic saying: "That fire (he says) is of such a substance: that it burns visible things, being itself invisible," as the Apostle [Paulus.] says: "For the things which are seen are temporal: but the things which are not seen are eternal." If therefore that fire by which those who depart from God are punished is eternal, it is also necessary that it be invisible: since, according to the Apostolic saying, only invisible things are eternal. Nor should you wonder (as Origen [Orige.] continues) that fire is invisible and tormenting, when you do not see the heat affecting bodies, and severely tormenting in those who are most severely afflicted by it. Therefore, this tormenting fire is of another kind than that which we have in common use, yet that supremely tormenting one is compared to it, since nothing among us is more tormenting than this visible fire: If we desire to avoid this eternally tormenting fire, let us beware lest there be in us an eternal evil disposition: but let it be such that we may receive that supreme fire unto joy, or at least unto the consumption of wood and stubble, and unto the purification of dross: so that we may be beautiful vessels of pure gold, to be placed in the heavenly nuptials and those blessed and eternal mansions.

--- Page 967 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**
**CONCERNING THE SWEETEST HARMONIES,**
*and that eternal pause in acquired blessedness. Eighth tone.*

[Large decorative initial letter E containing a figure playing a stringed instrument]

Putting the finishing touches on this last song of the newest canticle, we will imitate the more excellent musicians to the best of our ability: who always strive to make the newest harmony sweeter; and sometimes they are drawn by such sweetness that, were they not subject to temporal movements and did they not fail, exhausted by labor, they would prolong the song perpetually. But enduring as long as they can, now with continuous, now with alternating turns, they do not cease from beginning to end.
But the supreme choirmaster, whose song we attempt to describe, since he both transcends time and rejoices in eternity, now distributes and divides his songs through temporal periods, now leads them to eternity itself. For this harmonic machine (by some wondrous artifice, I know not what) he both subjected to temporal succession and freed from time itself: For all these elemental things are generated by daily and annual changes. And the heavens move in time, or (as we might more correctly say) being moved, they generate time itself. Nevertheless, the earth stands forever, and the heavens will never cease to be, quanquam quo ad motum & influxum (ut canit psalmographus) peri [Marginal note: Dauid] although as regards movement and influence (as the psalmist sings) they will perish.
He also completed the sweeter harmony of redemption in a few (I will not say) months, but days: nevertheless, abundant redemption remains perpetually with him: ma [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] and the eternal fruit remains. If anyone (says the Redeemer) eats of this bread, offered, namely, for your redemption, he will live forever, enjoying the fruit of that eternal redemption itself. He also wished to bring together the sweetest song of union, from merits acquired through time, to draw all to eternity itself with perpetual rewards, and he determined to make them co-eternal with himself. Hence he will free all from temporal succession whom, being lifted up from the earth, he will have drawn to himself with a better harmonic power quã Or [Marginal note: Orpheus Amphio.] than Orpheus and Amphion, placing them in most harmonious mansions, where (if we believe Augustine, once enticed by that sweetness) even numbers and corporeal harmonies, now hidden, together with other harmonizers, will be heard to resound around in public praises of the Creator and of that supreme beauty. Therefore, with the greatest diligence, those heavenly scribes of both testaments, Ezekiel and John, described those mansions with most exact figures and most harmonious measures and divisions, prout [Marginal note: Ezechi.] just as the Holy Spirit taught them. But Ezekiel describes only the measurements of the structure, its arrangement, its division for the twelve tribes, the sacrifices, and the name of the city. Ioan. [Marginal note: Ioan.] John, however, intimate with the Prince, admitted to the more secret inner chambers, brings forth sweeter songs. Both, however, are obscured by such a mist that unless the supreme sun with its heat thins out its density and with its light dispels its darkness, we will not be able to hear what they say, nor see what they describe and measure, to any extent: for they transmit such things wrapped in sensible enigmas, or so that from those things which the mind knows, it may be able to rise to the unknown:

--- Page 968 ---
TONE EIGHT. 414

and to discern invisible things through such sensible ones; or because, neither to us who hear,
nor to them who speak, has He yet delivered words by which those things can be expressed:
just as those who have seen them openly affirm that it is not lawful for a man to speak of them. Or
because the mind, still weighed down by the burden of its bodily mass, cannot ascend to these supreme things:
as Isaiah and Paul agree, that neither has eye seen, nor ear heard, [Marginal note: Isaiah Paul.]
nor has it entered into the heart of man, what God has prepared for those who love Him. Therefore;
if we too do not explain those mysteries, you will grant pardon: since they are to be treated
which transcend all our intellect: they escape all memory:
they surpass all eloquence. Yet, relying on a single aid, we will undertake this most arduous work:
since we have guides to whom God has revealed these things: as the same Paul [Marginal note: The same Isaiah.]
adds: But God has revealed these things to us through His Spirit. Hence more cautiously
speaks Isaiah, saying: Eye has not seen, O God, besides You, what You have prepared for those who await You.
Therefore, following these divine guides closely, as much as the supreme light
has illuminated our eyes, we will unravel in our words those things which they have entangled in their enigmas:
and we will especially pursue the more secret and fuller canticles of John:
who, resting on the Pegasean breast of Christ, between the two peaks of divine and human
nature, was so suffused with light, and so filled with that rapture: that he easily
became a prophet of divine things. Afterwards, from Patmos: an island, drawn by the divine spirit to the supracelestial
continent, now taught by an angel, now by the supreme harmonizer Christ
Jesus, now by various surrounding voices, he delivered to us those perfected
canticles: and with wondrous artifice, moving hither and thither, now ascending, now
descending, with full musical laws, he left no module of the supracelestial instrument,
nor any voice of musical distribution untouched. For by twenty degrees
musicians distinguish the entire harmony invented by them: which they placed upon the hand
so that practice might be easier and memory more tenacious. John touches upon just as many
modules, in which the entire supracelestial harmony is perfected. And
this under the figure of a city, which is presented as a celestial lyre, in which, when
all these voices are tempered, and touched by the supreme arch-musician, that harmony
transcending all others is perfected. All rejoice (says Dionysius) when the [Marginal note: Dionysius.]
Father moves: for the Son has become the organ of God, since in Him exist the ideas of all things created:
and in Him all are placed as pipes, whence
if anyone does not remain in Him, he can bring forth nothing useful or harmonious. The breath
moreover is the spirit filling all things: as it is said in the book of Wisdom: The Spirit of the Lord [Marginal note: Wisdom.]
has filled the whole world, and that which contains all things has knowledge of a voice.
The Father, however, is the first and principal mover of all, especially in that supernal city,
in which all things correspond to Him as pipes, strings, or modules of an instrument:
Declaring these modules, and dividing them into harmonies, we will follow John:
and with him, we will make Ezekiel agree as far as possible.

--- Page 969 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**
**MODULES OF THE FOLLOWING CANTICLE.**
Material.		Light.		Instruments.	Peace.
Arrangement.	Division.		Epithalamia.	Union.
Measures.	Guests.		Triumphs.	Felicity.
Structure.	Nuptials.	Rewards.		All good.
Adornment.	Victory.		Dominion.	Silence.

MODULE ONE, MATERIAL.
[Large ornate initial letter C containing a figure of a man] HY is that city said to be built of gold?	Harmony I.
Why walls of jasper?					Harmony II.
What do the twelve stones in the foundation mean?		Harmony III.
Digression: whence the stones derive their power.			Harmony IIII.
What is the true material of the heavenly city?			Harmony V.

Module Second, Arrangement.
On the general division of Ezekiel and John.		Harmony I.
Why is this city placed in a square?			Harmony II.
On the gates of the same city.				Harmony III.
What streets are there?					Harmony IIII.

Module Third, Measures.
On the particular measure according to Ezekiel.		Harmony I.
On the measure of firstfruits, or tithes.			Harmony II.
On the measure of the city according to John.			Harmony III.

Module Fourth, Structure.
Who built it.						Harmony I.
How, and with what glue it is compacted and united.		Harmony II.
Why the names of the Apostles and tribes in the foundation, and in the gates the names of angels are carved.					Harmony III.

Module Fifth, Adornment.
Typical description of the adornment according to Ezekiel.		Harmony I.
Why John does not express the adornment, as Ezekiel does.		Harmony II.

Module Sixth, Light.
What light is in general.					Harmony I.
What generated light is.					Harmony II.
How all created things proceed from light.			Harmony III.
How light illuminates.					Harmony IIII.
How light itself kindles and excites.			Harmony V.
How this light amplifies and expands.			Harmony VI.
How this light gladdens and beatifies.			Harmony VII.

Module Seventh, Division.
That that heavenly house and family is divided.		Harmony I.

--- Page 970 ---
EIGHTH TONE. 415

Concerning the particular mansions and seats of the blessed. Con. II.
Concerning the Merkabah, or tribunal of God according to the Hebrews. Con. III.

Module Eight, Guests.
How many guests there are in that city. Con. I.
Concerning angelic guests. Con. II.
Concerning human guests. Con. III.
Concerning divine guests. Con. IIII.

Module Nine, Espousals.
How, and when, the marriage between God
 and the soul was initiated. Con. I.
How it was contracted. Con. II.
How it was ratified. Con. III.
How it was consummated. Con. IIII.

Module Ten, Sustenance.
What bread is prepared in this feast. Con. I.
What wine. Con. II.
What bread, and what flesh. Con. III.
What fruits of this feast. Con. IIII.
What abundance, and sweetness of foods. Con. V.

Module Eleven, Instruments.
Concerning the first instrument, which is the globe of the heavens. Con. I.
Concerning the second instrument, which is the human tongue. Con. II.
Concerning the third instrument, which is our body. Con. III.
Concerning the fourth instrument, namely the angelic tongue. Con. IIII.
Concerning the angelic minds, and those of the blessed, which are themselves
 resonant instruments. Con. V.
Concerning the breath providing sound to all these instruments: which is the Holy Spirit, and the divine
 Word. Con. VI.
What those many instruments signify, which are mentioned
 in the Davidic hymns. Con. VII.

Module Twelve, Epithalamia.
Who sings the Epithalamia. Con. I.
Epithalamium for the bride. Con. II.
Epithalamium for the groom. Con. III.
Epithalamium for the marriage. Con. IIII.

Module Thirteen, Triumph.
What is a just battle. Con. I.
Concerning the most ample victory achieved by Christ for himself, and for his
 soldiers. Con. II.
The triumph, glory of the Emperor and soldiers. Con. III.

--- Page 971 ---
CANTICLE THREE

On the triumph of various Leaders after Christ's departure. Con. IV.
Module Fourteenth, Reward.
How great and precious is the reward of those fighting. Con. I.
That that reward is pleasant and eternal. Con. II.
Module Fifteenth, Dominion.
On the ample dominion of the prince. Con. I.
How just is the dominion of that prince. Con. II.
On the kingdom of the Fellow-soldiers. Con. III.
Module Sixteenth, Peace.
What Peace is. Con. I.
By whom Peace is given. Con. II.
How sweet and harmonious is Peace itself. Con. III.
Module Seventeenth, Union.
On the union of the blessed with God. Con. I.
Module Eighteenth, Felicity.
Who is happy and blessed. Con. I.
In what happiness consists. Con. II.
To whom perfect happiness is given. Con. III.
Module Nineteenth, All Good.
What is the good, which is called the true and supreme good. Con. I.
Module Twentieth, Silence.
On the Pause, rest, and silence, to which one arrives once the good, towards which we strive, has been attained. Con. I.
Hymn to be rendered in silence to God alone, with a pure and elevated mind. Con. II.

--- Page 972 ---
**EIGHTH TONE.** 416
**FIRST MODULE, MATERIAL.**
*Why that city is said to be built of gold. First Harmony.*

[Large Roman numeral I in margin]
**T**herefore, John, making the foundation of the heavenly building, describes it as made of gold and precious stones. For gold is not only for lithocolla for cladding walls, but for cement and glue for stones, for particles and nails binding the building: And what is wonderful, that gold does not obscure the brilliance of the precious stones, since it enjoys perfect transparency. Hence our composer says that gold itself is like pure glass: But precious stones are for the foundation, for the gates, and for the entire structure of the walls: so that both the stones and the glue may be most precious for that most precious dwelling: and incorruptible for those eternal mansions. And entering the inner chambers, as far as it will be right and permitted by the archimuseum, we will explore the mysteries and more secret harmonies, which are described under the type of precious stones and gold, which a ribbon signifies, according to that saying of the wise man: Before the golden ribbon runs out: [Marginal note: Sapien.] which ribbon, or golden thread, signifies true life. To do this, we must examine the properties and nature of gold and the stones themselves: For gold is beautiful and comely, hence called as if *horaios* (as some prefer) or from *aura*, which signifies splendor: although Hippocrates thought it was named from *aro* its inventor: [Marginal note: Hippoc.] For it is beautiful, and it makes other things beautiful: yet not all things (as Hippias, once deceived, had said), but those to which gold itself is fitting: [Marginal note: Hippias.] And it is of more perfect value among all metals and molten things. It is also by its very nature most constant, so that when extended into the thinnest foils, it is hardly broken: For from a denarius' worth of gold, one hundred and twenty-four foils of four digits on each side are produced in our times, whereas the ancients extended it to only seventy. Moreover, it is most tenacious with a certain yielding, for it yields to him who strikes and folds it, but it is not consumed by fire at all, not by rust, not by verdigris, not by the juices of vinegar and salt, conquerors of all things, nor by sublimated arsenic, which (according to Albertus) [Marginal note

--- Page 973 ---
Please note: The text provided for translation is in French, not Latin. I have translated the French text as requested. The previous page's Latin text discusses the properties of gold and ends with "but harming no one-", but the current page is a correction notice and not a continuation of that Latin text.

Incorrect pagination — incorrect date
NF Z 43-120-12

read PAGE 417, 418, 419
instead of PAGE 427, 428, 429

--- Page 974 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

nem. Gold, therefore, is divine or spiritual life, or charity, which bestows life:
and by which all guests are adorned, shine, become beautiful, live, and are enriched,
CHRIST. and those singers. If you lack this, hear the chief musician saying: I advise you to buy
from me gold refined by fire, so that you may become rich. This is said to those hurrying to those mansions:
for those who enter without that garment, which is called nuptial, are most shamefully expelled.
For all those guests ought to be clothed in this golden garment of charity,
Psalm. according to that prophetic saying: "In a gilded garment." This golden charity, therefore, was most ardent
Paul. in the martyrs and all saints; relying on which, Paul with great constancy said:
"Who will separate us from the love of Christ? Will tribulation, or distress, or famine,
or nakedness, or persecution, or sword? And if for God's sake we are put to death all day long,
and are pressed under the hammer of tribulations, yet in all these things we are steadfast: and
The Same. we overcome in charity."

--- Page 975 ---
TONE EIGHT. 427

may it lead [them]. Hence, it is rightly said by John to be diffused everywhere in the dwellings and among the heavenly guests. For by this the pavement is laid, by this the stones of the sanctuary are woven together, by this the walls and all the guests are clothed. And this garment, both of the walls and of the guests, is certainly not for covering: since there is nothing defiled, nothing susceptible to suffering, nothing shameful that ought to be covered, lest it appear ugly, or be tormented by cold, or be suffused with shame. Therefore, this garment will be an adornment, not covering, but transparent, so that nothing beautiful may be hidden, where no envy exists: nothing shameful may be covered, since all ugliness will have ceased. For all things will be open to each fellow citizen, so that each one may burn with love for their companion, rejoice in beauty: and jubilate with the most harmonious fibers of all members.

Why walls of jasper. Singer II.

**T**he structure of all the walls (says our singer John) [Marginal note: John] was of jasper: which the wise celebrate exceedingly. For it (jasper) delights in both sexes, rejoices in a beautiful appearance, excels in multi-faceted virtue, and glories in manifold variety and name. For Aaron, Pliny, Albertus, and other more recent writers who write about stones, [Marginal note: Aaron. Pliny. Albert.] report that up to seventeen kinds of jaspers are found: although Albertus only mentions ten. Of these, the principal one is green and luminous, having red veins. Next is the red one, like fire, and translucent: another, however, is opaque red: This one excels in utility, while that one in price. Another is like an emerald, encircled with a white line: which they call gramantia. Another is distinguished by several lines, and is called polycalamos: which more reclusive philosophers say is useful for singers. Its virtue is manifold, as Bocus, Aaron, Thetel, Zenothemis, Arnoldus, and Albertus report: [Marginal note: Bo. Aa. Th Ze. Ar. Al. Pliny.] but above all, it stops bleeding, renders the wearer chaste and pleasing: it is hostile to phantoms, and favors those who sing together, especially the polycalamos, as we have said. And Pliny, and Thetel in his work, pursue many other things about jasper, and how it is a most anticipated kind of stone, which we omit. Therefore, the heavenly singer very aptly describes the woven dwelling of the singers as being made of jasper, glorifying in the beauty of both sexes. since those living stones described by him, from which the city itself is built, are gathered from both sexes: so that they may draw forth the praises of Him who is (as Mercury says) [Marginal note: Mercury.] most full of the fecundity of both sexes, And His beauty most beautifully figures the beauty of all citizens and those fiery stones: For nothing but what is beautiful and comely ought to stand before supreme beauty. Moreover, its precious variety designates the royal splendor of that most beautiful city, which is surrounded by the variety of many precious things. For a Cherub differs from a Seraph: virtue differs from power: and an angel from an archangel. No less does saint differ from saint in glory (as Paul says) than star differs from star [Marginal note: Paul.] in brightness. Indeed, there are various kinds of jaspers, yet one species
GGG

--- Page 976 ---
CANTICI TERTII

of all: if several genera are admitted to be contained in the same species, just as the race
of Greeks, Italians, and Arabs agree in the same human species. In a similar way,
various are the kinds of those singers, namely, of prophets, patri-
archs, apostles, martyrs, confessors, and virgins: all, however, in
the same species are contained. But if we wish to look at the virtues of this stone:
what can be said more aptly for designating that edifice than that by its virtue
[Marginal note: Apoſto.] blood is stopped, since flesh and blood (as the apostle testifies) are exiled
from that kingdom, nor can those who pursue the appetite for blood and flesh
be numbered among the sons of God? And what is more suitable for those singers than this stone, which renders one
chaste? so that they themselves may sing those songs which those sang who
were not defiled with women, existing without blemish before the throne
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS] of God. Or at least, that they may be cleansed from defilement

--- Page 977 ---
TONE EIGHT. 428

however, there were also other precious stones: Although the denomination is made from those principal ones, from which the foundations are built. But ascending to the allegory, according to which that construction is described, that city is built especially upon the twelve apostles (Christ, however, being its firm rock); consequently, indeed, from many other stones, connected to these apostolic ones, and [Marginal note: John] added: which, since they are very many, mixed with that duodecimal number, I do not know by what number they can be comprehended. Hence John himself, after he divided the number of the elect, and those living and sealed stones by twelve thousands, adds: "and a great multitude, which no one could number." Which, however, neither increases nor disturbs that duodecimal division. But we will also say something else, returning to lower matters, that not all stones which are esteemed precious by worldly citizens are in value among heavenly citizens, such as the diamond: quiritia, agate, and many others, of which no mention is made in sacred scripture, neither by [Marginal note: Moses. Ezekiel. John] Moses, when he describes the stones to be placed in the breastplate of the high priest, nor by Ezekiel, when he describes a certain covering of the most fortunate Tyre woven from precious stones: nor here by our John: For the diamond, which is in such great value among the rich of this world, is rejected by divine men: because perhaps it harms those who receive it in a wondrous way: whence (as Mercury, and others experienced [Marginal note: Mercury] relate) it agrees with black Hellebore, and with the head of Olgol, or the head of the devil, indeed a northern star, whence all evil is spread: and thus concerning many other stones we could assign reasons why they are not admitted into that most sacred edifice.

There are also those who assert that the interpretations of stones were not made according to the literal truth: And among others, concerning יהלם (yahalom), which they interpret as jasper, some contend that it signifies the diamond: and if this does not please others, for the reason stated above. Therefore we will omit these things as lengthy and uncertain, even among the Hebrews themselves: and we will respond to the second objection by saying: that there are diverse settings of stones entering the foundation: and each of them could be from its own stone.

If, however, we wish to penetrate to the truth of the matter, we will consider how sacred and how mysterious the number twelve is, most celebrated by the Platonists, as well as by sacred scripture: as we touched upon above. For by this number, God's chosen family was divided in military coordination, in the distribution of the promised land, and in every celebrated progress. Also, the highest harmony and Christ's family are encompassed by the same number: to which also twelve apostolic princes were appointed. Who are called princes in warfare and in the kingdom: but in session, judges: but in the fabric of that supernal city, they are called foundations, not indeed primary ones, since no one (as Paul testifies) can lay another foundation, [Marginal note: Paul] except that which is already laid, CHRIST JESUS. Therefore, the discourse is about the secondary foundation: concerning which the same Paul [says] "built upon the foundation [Marginal note: The same] of the apostles and prophets:" I say, of the apostles, as regards the family
GGG ij

--- Page 978 ---
THIRD CANTICLE

this Christian, and true one; but of the Prophets, as to the figurative family.
These therefore are the twelve foundations: in which are the twelve names
of the apostles, and of the Lamb: to the declaration of which we shall presently come. For
the apostles are secondary foundations, since their souls, and the ranks bestowed upon them,
are stable, and most precious, and filled with precious virtues: therefore they are descri-
bed by precious stones, whose suitability we shall in some way review. For jasper,
of many kinds, and sprinkled with red drops, what else does it si-
gnify, but faith formed, sprinkled with charity and manifold in di-
[Peter.] verse faithful, most especially however and above all apostles in Peter, the prince of all
of them, and consequently of all believers? To whom also the keys of the heavens
are more particularly entrusted. Into which kingdom the first entry is through faith,
Christ saying: "He who believes and is baptized will be saved."
[James.] But in sapphire of a celestial color, is denoted the contemplation of James the Less,
surnamed the Just: by which he was always entirely carried into heaven: so assiduous in pra-
yers, that his knees came to the hardness of camels': And a true Na-
zarite separated from the world, not drinking wine or strong drink: nor allowing a razor upon
his head or beard, entirely sapphirine and celestial, always to that hea-
ven he looked, which is like the appearance of a sapphire stone (as E- says
[Ezekiel. John.] -zechiel) not without a great mystery to be discussed elsewhere. But by chalcedony,
sprinkled with all colors, is designated the charity of John: which is the form
embracing all virtues, and existing as the fulfillment of the law and
the prophets: concerning which he said: "He who remains in charity, remains in God, and God
in him, as in a city, and a special temple." But in the emerald of such
intense greenness, that it is not subject to any light or solar rays,
but rather surpassing all greenness, by its own virtue entirely all around
[Andrew.] tinctures the air, Andrew is denoted: who was so green and lively in the mystery
of the cross, that he never yielded to the eloquent Achaeans, nor to the strenuous Roman
governor Aegeas; indeed, dying, he so diffused the virtue of the cross that he
filled all Achaea with its vigor. The emerald is also (as Aaron says, and others who treat
[Aaron.] of stones) sprinkled with specks of diverse colors: hence so delightful, that there is no
more pleasing recreation for the eyes. There is also in the cross, preached, defended,
praised, and invoked by Andrew, a refreshment sparkling with various virtues, so that to the
afflicted soul, and to the contemplating inner eye, nothing is more pleasing, and delightful:
as the Apostle says: "But far be it from me to glory, except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Chri-
st." They continue about the emerald, that it sufficiently contributes to the knowledge of future
things, increases substance, restrains movements of lust, eliminates storms,
and in legal cases provides the power of eloquence. All these things are fitting for the cross
embraced by our Andrew. For he who delights and rejoices in it, recognizes all profitable
things, increases spiritual substance and merits, restrains lust, puts to flight de-
mons and adverse powers, and receives abundance of speech. Hence true Christ's

--- Page 979 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 429

fellow proclaimers, who everywhere preach the crucified king, draw such wisdom
(as Paul testifies) that none is greater. By the Sardonyx (if I am not mistaken) Matthias is denoted: For [Marginal note: Paul.]
that stone is composed of sard and onyx, and very much distinct from chalcedony,
sometimes with three colors, dark brown, black, and a middle color, and above it glows red like chalcedony,
and it expels lust and makes one chaste. And Matthias, first a [Marginal note: Matth.]
disciple, afterwards an apostle, filled with both dignities, and adorned with the chalcedony
of divine and singular fate in his election. His color was also threefold, on account of
his three privileges by which he excelled. For it is said that he was prudent in counsel,
wise in spirit, and eloquent in speech: all of which are denoted not without suitability by
those three colors. For to counsel and prudence Saturn contributes:
to whom a dark brown, or leaden, or bronze color is attributed. But to eloquence
Mercury favors, who, being in harmony with Saturn, is called a second Saturn:
But leaving these things, which are perhaps no less curious than long, let us continue
our concise course. In the Sard, which sharpens intellects, makes one gentle,
and kindles the spirit to joy, Thaddeus is suitably described: concerning whom it is [Marginal note: Thadæ.]
said, that when he preached the Gospel of Christ in the lower part of Pontus, he mitigated
nations raging with almost bestial customs by the holy doctrine of the Gospel, and
he aroused their intellects to perceive most subtly the evangelical mysteries and Christian
doctrine. But by the chrysolite, which comes from Ethiopia, and [Marginal note: Matth.]
shines like gold with burning sparks, Matthew is represented: whose lot
was in Ethiopia, where he also composed the Gospel, shining like gold, sprinkled
with the burning sparks of Christ's mysteries, which treats of His incarnation
and nativity in the beginning, of His preaching and miracles in the middle,
and of His passion, death, and resurrection in the end. It also has a connection
with the virtues of jasper itself, concerning which it is said, that it contributes to spiritual things, and bound
in gold, it resists nocturnal fears, and pierced and stuffed with ass's bristles, it
terrifies and drives away demons. For whence do we have greater power to strengthen spiritual
things than from the Gospel, provided that its doctrine is bound in the gold of
charity? And then we not only resist nocturnal fears inflicted by the powers
of darkness, but (what is more) we instill fear in them, the Prince promising
in the Gospel and saying: "Behold, I have given you power to tread upon [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.]
serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy": which power is granted
when it has been penetrated by ass's bristles: which perhaps will seem superstitious to someone
not understanding the nature of things: but let us leave the stone and its secrets to more
esoteric philosophers: and let us investigate how evangelical virtue is stuffed with ass's
bristles: which indeed is easy to know, if we understand why Christ commanded an ass
and a colt, its foal, to be untied on Palm Sunday, so that, riding on them, he might enter Jerusalem,
with the crowds applauding and children spreading garments and olive
branches: as it had been prescribed by a great mystery through the oracle of Zechariah: And [Marginal note: Zacha.]
why Abraham, the father of mercy, rode only asses (as it is read).
                                                                                                GGG iij

--- Page 980 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

For here it signifies clemency and piety, as is clear from a change of letters in the original Hebrew language. For חמור (chamor) is called a donkey, where if .ד. (dalet) is prefixed, saying
[Marginal note: Hebrews.] חסד (chesed), it signifies piety or clemency, to denote that Christ then began to exercise the supreme work of piety, by redeeming the human race. Therefore, those ancient fathers, aware of these mysteries, ordained that mystery to be celebrated with annual remembrance. Beryl also, favoring against enemies and disputes, making one mild in manners, and providing a good disposition, represents Bartholomew, who in Al-
[Marginal note: Bartholomew.] bano of Greater Armenia so greatly prevailed against the enemies of the human race that thereafter, bound by Bartholomew's chains, they gave no response, and he rendered the untamed Aonian and Bactrian peoples mild and of a more cultivated intellect for perceiving the evangelical mysteries. Topaz, with a golden greenness tending towards verdancy

--- Page 981 ---
**EIGHTH TONE.**

so that these celestial splendors, as certain divine powers, might shine both in the foundations and in the gates: and might be made harmonious with those twelve splendors and presiding intelligences, whose names are also said to be written or sculpted in the gates. And it might correspond to the twelve figurative and true tribes, whose names are also recounted as written in the same gates. And very beautifully, with the numbers first increasing, angels, apostles, and chosen tribes sweetly sing alternately, singing and responding as if with certain antitheses, in praise and glory of the supreme maker, continuously growing. Hence our harmonizer John often repeats that those twelve tribes, and those specially marked, were singing with tireless voices before the throne of God and the Lamb, now explicit and public songs, now more secret songs, which no one could sing, except those rejoicing in that purity and marked with that character. To which melody may the supreme prince deign, by his grace and by the intercession of so many singing together, to lead us: For indeed, a dwelling...

--- Page 982 ---
THE THIRD CANTICLE

Zacharias also the Babylonian, writing to Mithridates, says: "Great power and
human fates are in stones." But whence these come, a deeper speculation is sought.
Alexander the Peripatetic, not departing from his senses and qualities, opined
that these proceed from the elements, or from the qualities of the elements
composing the stones themselves. Which can in no way stand, since qualities are
of the same species, but the operations of stones are many and are proven to
agree neither in species nor in genus. Therefore, the Academics, ascending
higher, some of them attribute these things to the formative ideas of things:
Hermes, however, to the stars: Avicenna to the Intelligences: but Albertus
reduces such operations to the specific forms of things. And although these wise
men seem to oppose each other, yet if the matters are well considered, none of
them deviates from the truth, provided that their sayings are rightly understood:
For diverse things, as in many cases, converge to the same effect. For God, in
the first place, as the fount and origin of all virtues, bestows the seal of
ideas upon His ministers: But the Intelligences, as faithful executors, seal the
things entrusted to them with no other seal than the royal one: And the Heavens,
as instruments, dispose matter to receive those forms which (as Plato says in
Timaeus) reside in divine majesty to be led down through the stars, and the giver
of all forms distributes them through the hands of ministers, whom He has
appointed as rulers and guardians over His works. For the Creator does not need
them as co-workers: but He has them as ministers, just as royal and imperial
majesty requires. Nevertheless, the supreme moderator committed to them that
faculty in the things entrusted to them, so that all virtue of stones, herbs,
metals, and the like might be from these presiding Intelligences, as some wise
men assert: because the work and motions which we see in stones and metals
cannot proceed from a non-living thing with that life which their effect and
virtue demand. Therefore, the form and virtue of stones agree with the idea,
with the ruling Intelligences, with the disposing aspects of the heavens, and
with the disposed complexions of the elements corresponding to the influxes of
the heavens, by which the elements themselves are disposed. Thus, such operation
exists in this lower world through expressed forms, in the heavens through
disposing virtues, in the Intelligences through moderating reasons, in God
through ideas and exemplary forms. And thus all agree, both the executors of
effects and the describers of the causes themselves, although by understanding
each of them individually, we would have imperfect knowledge: but if sayings are
added to sayings, we will achieve the best knowledge in this matter and in many
others.

[Marginal note: Plato.]

What is the true matter of the supernal city. Con. V.

[Illuminated initial V containing a figure of a man] Since up to this point we have treated those things which have been
described by the prophets concerning the matter of heaven under enigmas, it
remains that we say something about the true matter of the supernal city:
Concerning which there is no small controversy, whether there is matter in
heaven or not: and if there is, what kind it is. For Pe-

--- Page 983 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 421**

[Marginal note: Peripatetics. Averroes]
some Peripatetics (especially Averroes) seem to assert that there is no matter there, because this [matter] is in the potentiality of contradiction, and for diverse forms: from which it would seem that heaven is subject to corruption, since that matter could receive

[Marginal note: Aristotle.]
another form. Aristotle, however, in his usual manner, in this as in other most difficult matters, barely touches upon something briefly and obscurely. Hence, the opinion left by them is quite dubious: since he neither proved the incorruptibility of heaven, but merely opined; nor did he determine whether a form could be given to matter that would entirely quiet its appetite, so that it would seek no further form. Nor did they prove whether the matter of heaven is of the same nature as the matter of inferior,

[Marginal note: Themistius. Simplicius. Avicenna. Philosophers. Theologians.]
and transmutable things. Themistius, however, Simplicius, Avicenna, and many other distinguished philosophers, together with our Theologians, run with full force into this opinion, and in many places attest that there is matter in heaven. Which Aristotle also implies by saying: "He who says this heaven, says matter," through which, namely, heaven receives the principle of individuation. Hence, the greater difficulty is to determine what kind of matter that of the celestial bodies is, if there is matter in them: because they do not seem to have the conditions of composites from this matter subject to transmutation,

[Marginal note: Albert.]
generation, and corruption. Hence Albert, following his Peripatetics, says that matter exists in heaven, but differs by an equivocal reason from that of transmutable things.

[Marginal note: Moses.]
This can also be easily inferred from sacred scripture: For Moses, when describing the matter of things, although he narrates that both the matter of heaven and of earth were created on the same day, nevertheless distinguishes one from the other separately, saying: "In the beginning God created heaven and earth," that is, the matter of heaven, and the matter of earth, as we declared above. Which perhaps some not improperly call the fifth essence: since it is distinct from the matter of the four elements, which are continually alterable, transmutable, and comminglable with each other, and [this fifth essence is] unalterable. The purest of all, however, is the matter of the empyrean heaven, and of the tenth [heaven]: which in some way tastes of the nature of spirit, as we have already declared. But since many affirm that elements are found in the heavens, as we discussed above, it will not be unpleasant to see from

[Marginal note: Hebrews.]
which element the heavens are said to be principally made. Hence, if we wish to follow the wise Hebrews, we will say that they are made of watery and fiery matter: not indeed of corruptible and alterable water and fire, but of a better kind: Which they confirm from the etymology of the word in their own idiom, in which the heavens are called השמים *assamaim*: where the last three letters, namely מים (*mayim*), signify waters without controversy: while the first two, which are אש (*esh*), by changing ה to א according to their rules, signify fire, and together those five letters signify fire and water: from which they assert the denomination of the heavens is derived as if from their component parts. But since they have a certain stability, so that they sustain the upper waters, they also seem to participate in earth: and also in air, so that respiration can occur there.

[Marginal note: Astronomers.]
Hence, not without cause and reason, in many places Astronomers say that some heavens are fiery, others airy, some earthy, and watery, which-

GGG v

--- Page 984 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

[Marginal notes: Zo. Cl. / De. Pla. / Aristo.]
some. Similarly, the signs of the eighth sphere are divided among the four elements, assigning three signs to each: but since fire is the noblest of the elements, some are of the opinion that the heavens are primarily fiery, as Zoroaster, Cleanthes, Democritus, Plato, and almost all the ancients, as Aristotle openly declares: and if the ungrateful disciple now ridicules his master Plato, now he secretly follows him, since he cannot depart from his doctrines, although he often seems to say otherwise. For he, writing to Alexander, relates that he received the fifth essence from the Brahmins: and that this is the fiery dwelling of divinity. Concerning God (he says), not erring, we say that He is in the fifth essence: which is matter absolute from all alteration and degenerating condition. Nor is it considered discordant that God resides in a fiery dwelling, who not only to Moses, and
[Marginal notes: Moses. / Paulus. / Plutar.]
by the testimony of Paul is fire, but also by the assertion of many outsiders. Plutarch, distinguished by manifold learning, writes that God is a spirit, an intellectual fire, having no form, but transforming into Himself whatever He wills, and making it equal to all things. From which one fire (as it pleases Zoroaster and He-
[Marginal notes: Zo. Ha. / Phœni. / Iul. Cæ. / Porphy.]
raclitus) all things were generated: which fire is called light by our John. So also in the theology of the Phoenicians (as Julius Caesar writes) it is held that from that incorporeal light emanates corporeal light and fire, by which we can be raised to that light and divine fire: Who (says Porphyry), existing as light, inhabits the ethereal fire, so greatly inflaming those nearer to Him that He converts them into fire: as we read in the psalm: "Who makes your angels spirits, and
[Marginal note: Psalm.]
your ministers a burning fire, or a flashing fire, or a flame of fire," as the Hebrew text reads. He also took up Elijah, his familiar minister, in a fiery chariot: so also concerning John, very similar to Elijah, the highest truth declared:
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
saying, "He was a burning and shining lamp." And all whom He intends to draw to Himself and connect with Himself, He deems to be renewed by spirit and fire. Hence, not without mystery, He appeared to Moses, whom He had chosen to promulgate the fiery law, in a fiery and burning bush. And He sometimes surrounds and defends us like fire from all adverse power, as He says through Zechariah: "I will be to them a fiery wall, O God,"
[Marginal note: Zachai.]
around them, just as He enlightened, fortified, and strengthened the apostles and disciples, previously instructed by evangelical teachings, with the Spirit, not only inflaming them, but also their descendants who were to be led by them into that fiery heavenly city: Whose appearance sometimes appeared to some purified eyes, as E-
[Marginal note: Ezechiel.]
zekiel says concerning the appearance he saw looking towards the heavens. "This was a vision running forth, a splendor of fire, and lightning coming out of the fire." By which fire may He warm, melt, and forge us into one with His most holy majesty, to whom be honor, praise, and glory forever and ever, Amen.

--- Page 985 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 422**

**SECOND MODE ARRANGEMENT.**
**Concerning the general division of Ezekiel and John. Part I.**

[Decorative initial T] Speaking in accordance with the measure of our harmonious city, we will proclaim why it seems to be divided in various ways by Ezekiel and John: For Ezekiel, in his first division, divides the structure into the temple, the city, and the whole promised region: And this [region] into twelve parts, for the twelve tribes, with twelve gates. But he also divides the temple into vestibules, chambers, courtyards, treasuries, porticos, the holy of holies, and other parts for the kitchen and special uses. John, however, entirely excludes the temple: [Marginal note: John] "I saw no temple in it," he says. Very fittingly and aptly, Ezekiel, describing the buildings of a figurative family, includes the temple necessary for it for prayer and making sacrifices. John, however, describes the house and city of the Christian assembly: who do not need another temple, than themselves already built into God's temple, according to the apostle's teaching. Therefore Christ says to that Samaritan woman: [Marginal note: CHRIST] "The time is coming, and now is, when true worshipers will worship the Father not on this mountain, or in the temple: but in spirit and truth." And thus we, purified here on the way, are made God's temple, receiving Him through piety, purity, and good works, just as the host Himself promises, saying: "If anyone keeps My word, My Father will love him, and We will come to him, and make Our dwelling with him." How much more shall we ourselves be a temple, when, namely, received into those eternal tabernacles, with open contemplation, face to face, and by mutual custom, we shall enjoy [Him] as citizens of that supernal city? Now, however, we domestically receive God as a guest, but then we shall be received by Him of whom John says: "For the Lord God Almighty is its temple, and the Lamb:" Indeed, of that city, and of the assembly of the blessed ascending there. He also describes the gates, through which entry is open to all: provided they are willing to hear the one inviting. He also describes its splendor, by which all are enlightened: as well as the river of the water of life, and the tree of life in the midst of its street, for continuing the life of those dwelling there forever. He also narrates the throne of the Lamb, who will reign there forever with His co-heirs.

**What the magnitude of this city is. Part II.**

[Decorative initial M] Great, indeed very great, is that house of God and of the blessed: so much so that Baruch exclaims, saying: "O Israel, how great is the house of God: [Marginal note: Baruch.] and the immense place of His possession. Great, and having no end, exalted, and immense:" as Pliny and some other wise men most aptly say, [Marginal note: Pliny.] that those who presume to measure it are filled with insane madness. Nevertheless, our John seems to comprehend it within a few stadia: [Marginal note: John] "And he measured," he says, "the city with a golden reed, twelve thousand stadia on each side, completing the whole city"

--- Page 986 ---
CANTICI TERTII:

forty-eight thousand stadia: which are six thousand miles. Ezekiel, however, measures it as four thousand five hundred reeds on each of the four sides: which, when calculated, yield eighteen thousand reeds: Which are forty-four thousand three hundred and forty [Marginal note: Hieron.] Roman paces, more or less according to Jerome: but they are thirty-one thousand five hundred and forty Venetian paces. For the Roman pace (as Jerome understands it) contains fifteen palms or a little less: the Venetian [contains] twenty palms exactly: whence this [the Venetian] is greater than that [the Roman] by a fourth part: a reed, however, contains thirty-seven palms, that is, six cubits and a palm: for a cubit is made up of six palms. Therefore, the entire circuit will be in total thirty thousand paces above one thousand five hundred, more or less, if the measurement is made with the Venetian pace. Nor should anyone wonder if John found the circuit of that city to be six thousand miles, which is described by Ezekiel as approximately thirty-one miles: because this new city built by Christ, like a bride adorned for her husband, ought to be so much greater than that ancient, and Israelite one, as this Christian family is greater than that figurative one: which was contained in the small land of promise. John also measures the height of the walls as one hundred and forty-four cubits, and all these things with a golden reed, the measure of a man, which is of an angel: and perhaps (God willing) we will explain these things in their proper place. Now, however, let us proceed concerning its magnitude, in comparison to which that described [city], indeed the entire circuit of the earth, which is thirty thousand miles, is considered as nothing, or like a grain of millet compared to a huge mountain: where no proportion is found. Nor indeed does reason admit that for so August a kingdom the city should be so narrow: and that in so humble a dwelling so many thousands of the elect should be received with that great multitude from every tribe, and from every nation, which no one could number. Therefore, if we wish to explain Ezekiel and John, this literal number must necessarily be abandoned by us. For sacred scripture [Marginal notes: August. Pythag. Acade.] (as Augustine rightly perceives), and the Pythagoreans, and the Academics care little about it, intending towards the proportion resulting from it, which they call the natural or formal number: and towards the divine, and the sacraments emanating therefrom. Observing this, we will easily make Ezekiel and John agree with other wise men [Marginal note: Ezechi.], who speak of the immensity of that heavenly city. For the sum of the entire circuit (as Ezekiel describes it) is terminated by eighteen thousand reeds. For the explanation of which it should be noted that the millennial number pertains to the ultimate completion, since it is a cube and a solid of the complete number: which is ten, beyond which no further [number] is given, but a repetition of the preceding numbers. Nor can a number be extended beyond a solid, which grows in length, width, and depth. Therefore, this number signifies the consummate perfection of that dwelling. Therefore, Ezekiel measures the city, the temple, and the space of the entire region with thousands of reeds: And John [measures] the same city

--- Page 987 ---
TOMVS OCTAVVS. 423

he measures by twelve thousand golden rods: By which number also he divides the multitude of the elect, and assigns a space of a thousand years to a quiet state, after calamities suffered: Daniel also enumerates by thousands, and a thousand thousands, and divides the army of angels. [Marginal note: Ezechiel. John.] [Marginal note: Daniel.] But that this thousand-number is multiplied by eighteen pertains to the guests: who are divided into nine choirs of angels, and into as many choirs of men, who are to be placed among those angelic ones: for each one will fly to that order, or company of angels, whose nature and office he bore in life, as we can learn from Gregory and other wiser men. [Marginal note: Gregory.] Indeed, these two nines of guest choirs joined together make eighteen. If, however, we wish to apply this number to the twelve tribes, we can indeed, by taking the number twelve, which pertains to those tribes, to which we will add the first perfect number six, by which, when twelve is multiplied, seventy-two arise: By which number were comprehended the wise men and judges of the people in that figurative family: and as many disciples in the true militia of Christ, according to the number of the celestial princes: as is held among the more secret theologians: [Marginal note: Theologians.] according to which number also languages are divided, and a scene assigned by skilled Astronomers for each sign of the Zodiac: [Marginal note: Astronomers. John.] but let us come to John. Here also he describes each square of the city by twelve thousand golden rods, comprising the entire circuit of forty-eight thousand rods. He also measures the height of the wall by the square of twelve, namely one hundred and forty-four: For here he uses the thousand-number as a perfect number, poured forth with ultimate expansion, and the growing first twelve: And this to denote the increase and multitude of the elect in the dwelling, and in the most perfect state denoted by the thousand-number. Which sum is expressed and terminated in א aleph, which signifies God Himself, and the first beginning and end of all things, into whom all multitude will finally be reduced, its course assigned by Him having been completed.

Why this city is said to be placed in a square. Conclusion II.

**F**IGURE of this city both describe as square to demonstrate solidity, which is denoted by a square figure, and by the quaternary number, from which that figure is derived: For this number is the foundation and root of all other numbers: whence also all foundations, both in artificial and in natural, moral, and divine things, are square: as we have touched upon elsewhere. [Marginal note: Plato.] Hence Plato said that the first foundations of this world machine were laid fourfold by the supreme artificer so that it might be solid. For solids (as he says) are always joined not by one, but by two means, between which means there is a corresponding proportion, just as between fire and air, air and water, and earth, and again between earth and fire. By which wonderful harmony the creator of the world connected them, so that they cannot be dissolved by another, except by Him by whom they were bound together. Therefore, so that the holy city might be firm and harmonious, full-

--- Page 988 ---
THIRD CANTICLE

full of mysteries, divides it by the square, solid, and harmonious number:
For in it all musical harmony seems to be contained: For in the quaternary
the double, triple, sesquialtera, and sesquitertia proportion is found: whence re-
sults the octave, double octave, fifth, and fourth, and also the tone, if four
are taken as three and one, which make eight, and again 4, 3, and 2, which make
9. From which number to 8 is the sesquioctave proportion, and it makes a tone: and thus from it
all harmony results. But so that it may be even more harmonious, it emphasizes in it the great
four-lettered name of God: with one letter presiding over each corner, and flowing
in, according to that which is found in the Books of Chronicles: I have chosen Jerusalem, that my [marginal note: paral.]
name may be in it. Excited by the influx of this most sweet name, the guests continually [marginal note: David]
praise the name of God, as the royal singer says: Praise the name of the Lord, blessed be the
name of the Lord from this time forth and for evermore. Therefore, in
that city, the morning stars and all the sons of God praise its maker: the twenty
four elders praise: and the hundred and forty-four thousand having his
name, and the name of his Father written on their foreheads. Finally, every
crowd with timbrel and choir, with strings and organ, with cymbals, and trumpets continually [marginal note: The same.]
praise the Lord: as the same royal singer concludes at the end of his hymns,
saying: Let every spirit praise the Lord: or as the Hebrew truth better has it:
כל הנשמה תהלליה *kol anessama tehale liah*: Which, interpreting word for
word, we say: Every *anessama*, that is, a soul purified and made superior or di-
vine, let it praise *iah*, which is a name hinting at the divine essence, to which
the blessed are introduced for contemplation. Here we have spoken in a roundabout way, because we do not have
names precisely expressing the meanings of those words, *iah*, and
*anessama*.

Concerning the gates of the same city. Con. III.

[Decorative initial P] The gates of our city are assigned twelve for the twelve tribes,
both by Ezekiel and by John: And three in each region,
or in each of the four sides: lest it be believed that that qua-
ternary is something different from the supreme Trinity. For John [marginal note: John.]
says that from each of the four regions there were three gates, so that the ternary
context may be understood in the quaternary: each of which multiplied by the other
leads to that most sacred number twelve, so often repeated above. For just as
three times four make twelve: so also four times three. Therefore the quaternary
of that most sacred name, and of other sacred things, is concluded in that most
excellent Trinity: and the Trinity in the quaternary. From which, when deduced into one another,
the number twelve arises: according to which all those celestial things are distributed:
the chosen families, the tribes, the designated foundation stones, the presiding angels, and
the gates, through which entry is made: For through the Holy Trinity to that kingdom
we must enter, as the prince of that kingdom says: Unless one is born again of [marginal note: CHRIST.]

--- Page 989 ---
TOMVS OCTAVVS. 424

... (from water), by which, that is, the Son (as we have declared elsewhere) and the Holy Spirit, he will not enter the kingdom of heaven: but neither will anyone be able to come to the Son, nor be reborn through Him, unless the Heavenly Father has drawn him. Behold then, that through these ternary gates of the most holy Trinity, entry into the celestial kingdom is opened. And therefore the Savior commands those to be initiated, that they be baptized [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] and confirmed in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. From whatever quarter therefore we wish to enter there, we must pass through these three gates: whether we enter from the east of adolescence, or from the south of youth and vigor: or from the west of old age: or from the north of decrepitude: or whether entry is made from the east of sublime goodness: or from the south of piety and clemency: or from the north of the fear of divine judgment: or from the west of benign condescension, one always enters the fourfold city through the ternary gates. Twelve angels are said to preside over these gates: because no one receives the faith of the most holy Trinity in the militant church, except through the ministry of a priest, who is called by Malachi [Marginal note: Malach.] the angel of the Lord of hosts. Nor is entry made into the kingdom of the triumphant through the gates of the most holy Trinity without the ministry of angels, as the supreme commander [

--- Page 990 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE.**

[Marginal note: CHRIST. John.] to shine with love: according to the sign given by the prince saying: *By this shall*
*men know that you are my disciples, and citizens of the supermundane city, if you have love*
*for one another. In the midst of whose street (says John) the Tree of Life was placed: and on*
*both sides of that tree flowed the river of life: so that we may understand that the inhabitants*
*are filled not only with charity, but also with wisdom, which is denoted by the river of living*
*water: according to that which is found in the book of*
[Marginal note: Wisdom.] *wisdom: And the water of saving wisdom gave him drink. Which wisdom is most excellently*
*said to abound and flow in the streets, as the wise man says: Wisdom preaches abroad, in the*
*streets she utters her voice, in the chief places of concourse she cries out.* Which I believe is done for a twofold
reason; one is, that everyone may perceive that wisdom is to be communicated to anyone, provided he himself wishes to receive it, as Mercury
[Marginal note: Mercury.] says, preaching with his son Tat: *God filled a wide crater with wisdom: and sent a herald,*
*commanding that whoever wished to receive the mind, which is true wisdom, should immerse*
*himself in this bowl.* The other, that magistrates, who especially dwell in the streets, should be persuaded
that they ought to be entirely imbued with divine wisdom. So also, those who possess more important places in that
higher city are believed to be filled with greater wisdom and charity. And these are far more excellent
than worldly citizens: because the tree of life is present to them, from which, continually plucking
the fruits of life, they live in perpetual happiness. But if they do not diligently frequent these streets,
so that they may rejoice through charity in the assembly of their neighbors, and enjoy the presence
of the prince, from which they may be continually inflamed with a better love, failing
from the fount of all good and beauty, they are disfigured and perish full of ignominy:
[Marginal note: Jeremiah.] as Jeremiah lamenting says in the Lamentations: *Their face is darkened above coals, they are not*
*known in the streets: Their skin has cleaved to their bones, it has withered without, namely, the river of living water: and has become like dry wood*
*to be burned with perpetual fire.*

[Three leaf-like symbols] **THIRD MODULE. MEASUREMENT.**
On the particular measurement according to Ezekiel. Con. I.

[Large decorative initial E] Although we have touched upon the magnitude of this city in the records of both prophets,
I nevertheless deem it opportune to proceed to the particular
measurements of the same city, and of those things which pertain
to it. And first we will survey those things which Ezekiel, prophesying, *describes with a most hidden mystery, harsh expression, and broken speech:* He
indeed measures with his reeds some building, I know not what, quite obscurely: Also
the temple, treasuries, gates, vestibules, and many things which he considers conducive to those buildings:
Afterwards the torrent, first fruits, remnants of first fruits, the city,
and the suburbs. All of which he envelops in such great enigmas, and expresses so briefly,
that it can scarcely be understood. Nevertheless, as he who revealed to the prophet, no-

--- Page 991 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 425**

Nevertheless, as he who revealed to the prophet, if he has enlightened our eyes, we will at least sketch out those hidden mysteries. And first of all, I think this should be stated beforehand, so that access to those inner sanctuaries may be easier for those striving, that Ezekiel begins with the divine tribunal, and after a varied description of things, finally concludes with the measurements of those things that have been touched, as if the ultimate effects are to be joined and united with the first through those measurements. Therefore, at the beginning of the vision, he sets forth God and His tribunal with wonderful artifice and hidden mystery; afterwards, under the name of a manifold structure, he measures man by proportioning him with God, as well as those things that pertain to him. But before we reveal the secrets, we will briefly explain what that measurement is, about which he speaks literally in the text. "And in the hand of the man was a measuring reed of six cubits, a cubit, and a palm." We have this precisely in the letter (text): the meaning of which words is: The reed contains six cubits, to each of which a palm is added. But since a cubit contains six palms, with that one added, there will be seven: And calculating the total measure of the reed as seven times six palms, the number of palms amounts to 42. And this calculation differs from that of Jerome, adduced above, in which there was no hesitation, when [Marginal note: Jerome] the measure of the reed was only six cubits and a palm: but not six cubits: and as many palms. Therefore, following the true interpretation according to the mind of the prophet, we say that that measure was not 37 palms, as our translation sounds, but 42, and with a most hidden sacrament, concerning which we will relate only what the divine oracles permit. For by palm and hand, or fingers, work is carried out: and this under the auspices of the number forty-two, by which God went forth into work, and measures all things, as is common among the wise. Hence, not without mystery, the more secret theologians said that the name of God of 42 letters is extracted from the first [Marginal note: Theologians and Moses] words by which the fabric of the world is narrated and described by Moses with a hidden mystery: And again, through the stations of the same number (as Jerome prudently observes), it leads the people, brought out of Egypt by such a celebrated mystery, to the land [Marginal note: Jerome] of promise, bearing the type of a better land. But with this measure, which is unique and 42, it sometimes multiplies all things by numbers, sometimes by hundreds, sometimes by tens, and thousands, distributing them with their own mysteries. Therefore, with this measure, the prophet first measures himself: And consequently [Marginal note: Paul] every man: and this under the figure of an unexpressed building, so that the mystery may be kept silent. Afterwards he measures that temple, concerning which the apostle says: "You are the temple of God." After this, the treasuries and storehouses, that is, the powers of the soul, in which heavenly treasures are received. Then the gates and vestibules, which are the exterior senses, and all things that lie externally to man: yet pertaining to the integrity of man. After these things, he measures the whole city, that is, the inner man, who has become a city and a dwelling receiving God as a guest, and the holy angels. After which he also measures the suburbs, that is, those external things that belong to man: and through which there is an entrance to God, and of God to us, and union with Him. Finally, he comes to the first fruits or tithes, namely good works, which are offered to-

--- Page 992 ---
CANTICI TERTII

...which we offer to God, which must be measured, so that a good and abundant reward, suitable for them, may be proportioned.
[Marginal note: CHRIST] For with the same measure (says the prince of all things) with which you have measured, it will be measured back to you, yet with a geometric proportion, each thing returning a hundredfold from God's greatest liberality. Very beautifully, therefore, he who demands tithes, returns the same to us in thousands of gifts, as will be clear to one calculating from the hundredfold retribution of the Gospel. Or let us say, that tithes received by God from numbers come to thousands: because with the added grace of God, to whom the thousand is attributed, those things which were previously tens, become ten thousands, and so on for the rest. This also must be noted, that at the end of the vision, he measures by thousands of measures, what he previously measured by unity, a ten, and twenty-five. Nor must this be omitted, that he measured the thresholds of the gate with one reed, and a little later he adds that the threshold of the gate was ten cubits. All these things, the prophet, not ignorant of the sacraments, described by their mystery. For the measure of all things is made by one, which denotes the beginning, and by ten, the completion of all simple numbers: because the remuneration and reward of all is He who is the beginning and the end: And from this, first fruits and tithes are rightly owed to Him. Then from ten, he passes to a hundred, assigning the distance between gate and gate by hundreds of cubits: because the reward differs by a hundredfold multiplication for those who enter through one gate, and those who enter through another. And yet he comes to a thousand, namely the cube of the complete number ten: in which he encloses and consummates all measure, although he does not fully express it: rather, he frankly confesses that he is immersed in such a deep sea: for when he came to the east, from where is the origin of all measures, he says that the waters were overflowing too much from the right side, from where mercy, grace, and all gifts [come], denoting that those things which the giver of all good things has imparted to us are so great that we cannot comprehend them. And he said, that the man coming from the east (where is the fount of all good things, although they are communicated through the power of the right hand) measured a thousand cubits with a cord: And the said waters reached up to the ankles: And he measured yet another thousand, behold the waters up to the knees: And he measured again a thousand, and was led through the water up to the loins. But when the measurer proceeded further, the waters grew so much that he could not cross: because the waters were too deep. But, to relate something of the secrets (which nevertheless may be spoken of): as long as the measurer measured those things which pertain to the animal man, whether they be ankles, knees, or loins, or kidneys, he could cross the deep waters of wisdom, by which man himself is disposed and proportioned. But when he proceeded further, namely to those things which pertain to the inner man: no further passage was given to him. Since, therefore, these things are so great that the prophet's shoulders succumbed under the burden, much less will our shoulders sustain such a burden of wisdom: because while man is spiritual, God, who is infinite, dwells in him. For the measure of the temple and the city being completed, and the sacred rites perfected, the prophet adds: And the name of the city is יהוה שמה Adonai Sama, which
[Marginal note: Ezekiel] interpreted, means: The Lord is there, that is, in man already made into a city...

--- Page 993 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 426

and the temple of God having been established: from which the Lord himself will never depart, just as he completely departed from the synagogue, and from many in the church: yet not from all, since he promised, saying: I am with you until the consummation of the age. These things, as far as the measure of the city according to Ezekiel, have been very lightly touched upon: so that readers may perceive whither such exact measures tend: which assuredly do not refer to that land often promised in the past, but in our time and the prophet's time stripped bare, and despoiled of sacrifices, ceremonies, treasuries, suburbs, tithes, and first-fruits. Therefore, it measured us, and our works, and corresponding rewards: all of which are subject to God's balance and measure.

De mensura primitiarum, aut decimarum. Con. II.

[Decorative initial N depicting a figure, possibly a saint or scholar, in a landscape] I also do not think the measures should be omitted, by which the prophet measures the first-fruits, or (as we better say) the tithes to be offered: which are called תרומה *teruma* in Hebrew, as we read most fully in the book of Exodus. [Marginal note: Exodus.] For the prophet says: "And upon the border of Judah from the eastern side, even to the side of the sea, there shall be first-fruits, which you shall separate, twenty-five thousand reeds in length and width: as individual parts, both from the eastern side to the sea, and in other sides: or both in length and in width, so that the entire circuit is by one hundred thousands" – I will not say of reeds, because 'reed' is not found here in the Hebrew text, but is added in our translation at will, and not according to the mystery. For here the reward is measured by one hundred, by which those are rewarded who offer to God the true first-fruits of their body, kept purely and chastely. For these (as Jerome thinks) [Marginal note: Hieron.] are crowned with the number one hundred, which is multiplied by the prophet by a thousand, always attributed to God: so that the reward corresponding to a work pleasing to God may be understood as divine. But the first-fruits of the other tribes are measured by twenty-five thousand from the northern side, and the same from the southern side. But from the eastern side by ten thousand: and from the west by the same number, which, brought together into one, yield seventy thousand. The root of this number is seven, indeed the number of remission, led by ten, a complete number: and again brought back by the divine thousand denotes the works, offerings, and rewards of penitents, who expect remissions from the true seven: afterwards the reward of completed works supported by the divine thousand. Hence, those who cannot dedicate themselves with Judah, the royal tribe, inasmuch as they have been quite faithless and rebellious, at least let them offer the oblations of penitents through the hands of a priest, not just any priest, and rather one polluting the offering than offering it, but through the hands of those who are of the sons of Zadok, which means 'just' or 'righteous': concerning whom it follows: "Who kept my ceremonies, and did not err, when the children of Israel erred, as also the Levites erred." But this Zadok (as Jerome thinks) [Marginal note: Hieron.] is Christ, a priest forever, and just: therefore it is said, "according to the order of Melchizedek": who is interpreted as "my righteous king". Concerning whom

HHH ij

--- Page 994 ---
**CANTICLE THE THIRD**

David. [marginal note] is sung by the royal prophet under the name of Solomon in these words: "Give thy judgment, O God, to the king: and thy justice to the king's son." Therefore, all who wish to be admitted through pleasing offerings into the royal city and place, which the prophet figuratively describes, must be sons of this king and reborn by him. But I also think that this should be noted, which is said: "And the first fruits of that land, namely, shall not be changed, nor transferred," because they have been sanctified to the Lord, and offered with a perpetual offering, and not to be repeated annually, like those which were offered annually in a certain series from corruptible fruits: and sometimes to be polluted by the iniquity of priests. Furthermore, the prophet pursues many things concerning the measurements, and number, and situation of the suburbs, and their boundaries, and concerning the measurements of oil, and other things which were to be offered in sacrifice: which we leave to be explained by those who interpret the literal context: For we have only shadowed forth those things which we deemed to pertain, through a certain type, to the measure of the heavenly city, in which we are blessed.

Concerning the measure of this city according to John. Con. III.

**S**The measure of John seems to differ considerably from that of Ezekiel: For the latter (Ezekiel) measures with a wooden reed those things which pertain to the figurative family, not yet freed from the burdens of stones, wood, and straw: but John describes the merits of the blessed, and the fabric of that city, which we declared above to be woven from gold and precious stones: therefore it is rightly said to be measured with a golden reed. However, he does not express how great the measure is: because neither can those things which he measures be determined: since the glory of the blessed is about an infinite and interminable object, continually filling those who receive it according to their capacity: and that place is immense and truly terminable by no measure. Nevertheless, with his reed, he leads that circuit to twelve thousand stadia: and the walls through twelve square cubits, namely one hundred forty-four thousand, running through both in some way with great mystery. He says therefore that he who spoke with him measured the measure
John. [marginal note] of a man, which is of an angel: but how great it is, he does not declare even in this place. In that, however, which he says, that the measure of a man, and the measure of an angel, he implies the reward in which each is blessed. Which, since (as we have said) is God: its measure can neither be terminated nor expressed. Nevertheless, the measure of an angel and of a man is said to be the same, because it is given in the same proportion, provided that their capacity and merits demand it. Therefore, with that measure, the angel who spoke with him measured the city, by twelve thousand stadia: which is set in a square, and its height is as great as its width, since these are equally related to each other. And he measured its walls one hundred forty-four cubits. Many things occur here which present no small difficulty: And first, how the city can be equal in width and height, when the width is said to be twelve thousand stadia, but the height only 144 cubits. How also is it to be understood that in a square

--- Page 995 ---
TONE EIGHT. 427

whether it is built, or because on each side there are twelve thousand stadia, and the entire perimeter is forty-eight thousand stadia: or indeed because the entire perimeter is completed in twelve thousand stadia, with each side extended to only 300 thousand stadia: And what, moreover, are stadia, and what are cubits, for that supernal and divine city measured by that golden reed, whose length was said to be interminable. To these objections, as the Lord will deign to help, we shall give a satisfactory answer. For if we wish to preserve the literal meaning, we will say, regarding the first point, that the height of the walls is one thing, and the height of the city is another: For the walls are completed in one hundred forty-four cubits, as the text most clearly reveals: but the height of the city, which John says is placed upon a great and high mountain, has from the root of the mountain up to the top of the walls, the measure of those twelve thousand stadia, a mystery to be declared immediately. But that city is square (says John) and [Marginal note: John.] placed in a square: which is understood thus (in my judgment), that each side of the city is twelve thousand stadia: and the entire perimeter is four times twelve thousand, which makes forty-eight thousand, and not from a square number, as some, deceived, distort the literal meaning, concluding the perimeter to be one hundred forty-four thousand stadia, which is not an equilateral square (as they suppose) but merely a squaring of numbers, omitting the thousands, in which especially the mystery of this measurement consists. For if they square

--- Page 996 ---
Incorrect pagination — incorrect date
NF Z 43-120-12

read PAGE 428
instead of PAGE 432

EIGHTH TONE.                    427

whether it is built, or because on each side there are twelve thousand stadia, and the whole
perimeter is forty-eight thousand stadia: or indeed that the whole perimeter is completed in twelve
thousand stadia, with each side extended to only 300 thousand stadia: And what, moreover, are stadia, and what are cubits for that heavenly and divine city measured by that golden reed, whose length was said to be endless. To these objections, as the Lord shall deign to help, we shall give a sufficient answer. For if we wish to preserve the literal meaning, we shall say, first, that the height of the walls is one thing, and the height of the city is another: For the walls consist of one hundred and forty-four cubits, as the text most clearly reveals: but the height of the city, which is said by John to be placed upon a great and high mountain, has from the root of the mountain up to the top of the walls, the measure of those twelve thousand stadia, the mystery of which will be immediately declared. But that city is square (says John) [Marginal note: John.] and placed in a square: which is understood thus (in my judgment), that each side of the city is twelve thousand stadia: and the whole perimeter is four times twelve thousand, which makes forty-eight thousand, and not from a square number, as some, deceived, distort the literal meaning, concluding the perimeter to be one hundred and forty-four thousand stadia, which is not an equilateral square (as they suppose) but merely a square of numbers, omitting the thousands, in which especially the mystery of this measurement consists. For if they square it

--- Page 997 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

dam are called square, so that they may correspond to the four-letter name. It remains now to be declared, why that city is measured by cubits or stadia. And here we briefly say: because we do not have other words at hand, by which divine things may be more suitably explained, than these of ours, which are certainly most suitable for the things we wish to express, to God not without mystery, both Noah's ark and the tabernacle of the covenant are said to be measured by cubits: and the immense edifice of the heavenly city is said to be measured by stadia. Which measures were then in use, and opportune for measuring those structures: but ascending to allegory, let us hear how well and elegantly rewards, and the place of rewards are measured by cubits and stadia. For the cubit imports the arm and hand simultaneously: by which we outwardly distribute and perform good work. The stadium, however, is completed by a Herculean race in a single breath (as it is said): Whence by this stadium every possible affection is signified to us, by which as if by feet we are carried to God. For by feet in sacred eloquence, affections are always mystically designated. And these ought to be of strong, great, and vigorous spirit, and carried by a single breath, that is, by a single intention. But by the cubit, arm, and hand, the work to be rewarded is understood. And since the reward and glory of that heavenly city correspond to work and affection by geometric proportion, therefore things pertaining to that city and glory are said to be measured by cubits and stadia. But how many cubits and stadia themselves there are, is not expressed: because those heavenly things cannot be terminated by our number: although they are said to be commensurate with our works,
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] and affections by geometric proportion. Both of which Christ, the prince of that city, explains in the Gospel, saying: "You will receive a hundred for one," behold a geometric proportion: "and you will possess eternal life," behold an unending measure. Because affections and works, when sprinkled with accepting grace and embraced by God's charity, smell of God himself: and therefore they rejoice in that divine millennium: And through Him they are multiplied as many times as that divine name, from which is all virtue, is invoked.

**FOURTH MODULE. STRUCTURE.**
Who built it. Con. I.

[Decorative initial 'V' containing two figures in a landscape] Who built this city and our harmonious dwelling, and full of all harmony and joy, John clearly declares, while he says: "I saw the holy city, Jerusalem, de-
[Marginal note: John.] scending from heaven, prepared by God, as a bride adorned for her husband." So it itself descends from heaven, and its Calotechnius, that is, good architect, builder, and adorner: so that looking up to it, he might lead us back to heaven itself.
[Marginal note: John. The Church.] For John speaks of that structure woven from living stones, as the Church sings: "Blessed city, Jerusalem, called vision of peace: which is built in the heavens
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] from living stones: and adorned with angels, as a betrothed companion:" It is certainly prepared in the mind of the builder from the primal constitution of the world, as it is said in the Gospel: "Come"

--- Page 998 ---
**TONVS OCTAVVS. 432**

ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For the supreme architect prepared a threefold dwelling for the human guest: one indeed is that heavenly kingdom, and the dwellings of the blessed. The second is this earthly one for our pilgrimage: from which, most elegantly arranged, we can easily conjecture how great and of what kind that is, which he prepared for our eternal dwelling. The third is this one constructed upon a foundation, which indeed is Christ, and upon the twelve apostolic foundations, made from living stones, and measured by the measures of Ezekiel and John, concerning which we touched upon above. And so great is the harmony of these three, that from one we can infer another, provided we well understand the nature and arrangement of each building: that this one, which we now inhabit, is defiled and lowest: and that one to which we tend is purified and most exquisite: that also which is in the middle, and under whose auspices we hasten to that supernal one, is spiritual, namely the house and city of the church, within whose bosom or embrace it is necessary for us to be contained, if we wish to ascend to the heavenly and supernal. For these structures are similar, constructed by the same artisan: and each bears his image according to its capacity: Hence there is a symbol and likeness among them, from which, by treating of one, we can also understand something of another. Nor was there any other maker of these buildings, except Him of whom it is said: For He is the artisan of all, possessing the power of all, foreseeing all things.

How, and with what glue, this structure is compacted and united. Con. II.

<span style="font-size: 200%; line-height: 0.8em; float: left; margin-right: 0.1em;">O</span>MNIA multiple things which come together into one, must be joined either by art, or by nature, or by divine mystery. For stones in a house are connected by cement, lime, and iron or bronze clamps, over poured lead. Wood, however, is joined by nails, or by glue made from cheese, or fish, or ox-hide, which is considered the most perfect. But bones in the human body are bound together by nerves, flesh, and skin. And sometimes stones, and diverse bodies, by a certain natural force, I will not say are glued together, but are united: like two trees by grafting: and oysters with stones by a certain more hidden force of nature. I have also seen human bodies turned into stones, and so united with the stones, that they already seemed to have become one body, and that a homogeneous one. And because the force of nature is stronger than art, therefore it binds more strongly. But since the divine power is the strongest of all, therefore it not only connects but also unites. And this force is of His holy and great name, of which it is said: O Lord, our Lord, how admirable is thy name in all the earth: namely, both in the upper and lower, binding, connecting, and uniting all parts and their members together in both. In imitation of which, in Jerusalem (which bears the type of that supernal city which we describe), God commanded that a temple be built: Afterwards he added in that volume, which in Greek is called Paralipomenon, but in Latin "words of days" (Chronicles): "I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name may be there: which I have chosen: that a temple may be built in it for my name." But not only the stone temple, and the whole great machine of the world, but also the rational

HHH iiij

--- Page 999 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

—rational, and the human structure is bound by the bond of that name: For when the human family made a division in Abel and Cain (for in Abel a divine, and in Cain a diabolical family is formed), he, who was according to the flesh and the devil, pursuing in the usual way him who was according to the spirit, killed Abel: but it was immediately restored in Seth, and began to multiply in Enos, the son of Seth himself. So that it might be joined by a proper bond, scripture says: **Then the name of the Lord began to be invoked**, although faulty texts have: "He began to invoke the name of the Lord:" for it was invoked, and interposed as a bond, glue, and chain. So
[Marginal note: Deuter.]
also in Deuteronomy, after the Lord had given a precept concerning the bond of charity, which all who are of God ought to have – priests, Levites, servants, handmaids, strangers, and pilgrims – in offering, feasting, cohabiting, and suchlike, he added: **That my name may dwell there**, connecting all things, that is. So also
[Marginal note: Ieremię.]
Jeremiah says for the chosen family: **But you, O Lord, are in us, and your name is invoked upon us:** Lest this be believed to be omitted in the homeland,
[Marginal note: Ioannes.]
John says: that those who were sealed had his name, namely the Lamb's, and the name of his Father written on their foreheads. But what is hidden here, there it will be open, and
[Marginal note: Idem.]
manifest to all: as he testifies at the end of the vision, saying: **And they will see his face, and his name written on their foreheads.** And first, in baptism, it is written through military service: when a man, about to serve as a soldier under Christ, receiving pay
[Marginal note: Theolo.]
from him, is marked with a character (as our theologians say) or receives the name, which is sculpted on his forehead: so that he may be recognized by every spiritual soldier at least. Afterwards the same name is written, when a man triumphs in war: as
[Marginal note: Ioannes.]
John says at the beginning of the vision: **He who overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God: and he will not go out anymore: And I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God: and my new name.** Very beautifully the victor and triumpher is placed as a pillar and support for others in the edifice and temple of God, which is that triumphant church: just as the victor and strong one was a pillar and support for others in the militant church itself. In this, therefore, the name of the great God is written, as if inscribed in his family, and adorned with his lineage. And the name of the city Jerusalem is written, not indeed that one built by Shem in the land of Canaan, but that one which descends from heaven, built, that is, by the Son of God, who came from heaven: Whose name is Jerusalem, just like that material one which bears the type of this one. But Jerusalem is interpreted as "vision of peace": of eternal peace, indeed, from which our blessedness springs, according to that saying of Augustine: "Vision is the whole reward." And this is said to be sculpted in the blessed one, so that it may never be removed from him: but that he may possess it perpetually by a certain peculiar right. Moreover, a new name will be written, namely JESUS, in which ancient names are concluded with great mystery: and they will be called (as some assert) co-heirs of Jesus Christ, Jesuanis: and deservedly, especially because both are to be connected by the same bond: whence from him as the nobler one (as indeed sufficiently con-

--- Page 1000 ---
TONE EIGHT.                                                                    429

gruit) a denomination will be made.
   \*Why are the names of the apostles and tribes inscribed in the foundations, but in the gates\*
      \*the names of angels are inscribed. Con. III.\*

[Marginal note: E]  **A** *nd if the names of all the elect are inscribed in that holy ci-* [Marginal note: CHRIST.]
*ty, as the highest truth testifies, saying: *Your names are written*
*in heaven*. And if each one has the name of JESUS written,
and the name of His Father on their forehead: so that their connection may be perfect.
Nevertheless, the names of the apostles and tribes are especially said to be inscribed
in the foundations: and the names of the angels in the gates. Which inscription does not
only refer to characters, because that would be of little moment: but to the hidden
virtue, which thrives in the names themselves, according to which names were imposed
on the elect, by Him who said, "I know you by name." But concerning few is the name
expressed, which the mouth of the Lord named: and if He calls the names of all stars, and men
signified by stars, which are also written in the heavens: and according to
them we shall be named there. Nevertheless, we have the explained names of certain ones, given to them by God,
such as Abraham, Isaac, Israel, Jedidiah, John, JESUS. For Abraham
was called Abram, but by God's command (as we read in the book of Genesis) he was called A-
braham, with the letter ה (he) added, which signifies five in number. Which
quinarius number, added to the former name, which is written thus אברם and imports 243
in number, constitutes the name which is written thus אברהם and renders in
number 248. as many as there are bones in the human body: and as many as there are affirmative precepts.
Therefore, there, when He wished to adapt the name, He added ה, which imports five,
He prefaces it: *Walk before me, and be perfect* in virtues, namely,
and in my precepts signified by the bones. Which quinarius number (as He
immediately adds) He took away from Sarah, who was previously called Sarai, which in number
imports five hundred and ten, a mystery to be declared elsewhere: and she remained
with only five hundred and five. And just as here it was taken away from the woman,
and added to the man, so in the first parents it was taken from the man, and given to the woman,
who was formed from the rib taken from the man. Hence Adam's fall, and hence Abraham
perfect before God. Let us not proceed further here than is permitted. Isaac also
was thus called by Father Abraham, alluding to the mystery of Sarah's laughter in
the oracle of the angels: and hinting how laughter and joy should be for the Father,
just as Ishmael was a burden and annoyance: whence he was cast out from the paternal home together with his mother by God's command.
Jacob received the name Israel from the angel with whom he wrestled,
that is, prince or heir of God: and because he prevailed with the great prince of God,
he became both father and prince of the people warring under the true God. But also
John was named by an angel: so that the name, which signifies God's grace, might be
fitting for the precursor of the law of grace, and the messenger of the most merciful lawgiver. As for the Son
of God, with what great solemnity that name JESUS was imposed, since we have touched upon it elsewhere,
therefore here we will pursue other things. The names, therefore, of the apostles in the founda-
                                                                                                HHH v

--- Page 1001 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

(Continuing from previous page: Therefore the names of the apostles were inscribed on the founda-)tions, since they themselves founded the church in the twelve parts of the world,
nevertheless, upon that universal and unique foundation, which is Christ
[Paulus.] JESUS, who was laid, as the apostle says. Upon which principal apo-
stolic foundations were laid, since they themselves also sustain this building, as the same apostle says: "Built
upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets." But since in this new
city, which we describe, the principal foundations were the apostles, therefore their names
are said to be inscribed on them. But on the gates are beautifully carved and recounted the names
of angels: whose office it is to lead us into the royal court, just as God
[Exodus. Lucas.] says in Exodus: "Behold, I send my angel, who may go before you, and guard you on the
way, and lead you into the place which I have prepared for you." And in the Gospel of Luke we have
that angels carried the soul of Lazarus to the place, namely, of salvation: where the souls
of the elect were carried, before the gate of heaven was opened. These angels, even if they distribute-

--- Page 1002 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 430

...distributed throughout the whole building, which is made from all of them. There are also names of angels as guardians in the gates. But the name of God is in the whole building, and on the forehead of each guest, binding, uniting, consolidating, vivifying, and deifying the whole building.

      [ornament] FIFTH MODULE, ORNAMENT.
    Typical description of ornament according to Ezekiel. Con. I.

[Illuminated initial O] The ornament of this city is extensively described by Ezekiel under the type of a bride elevated by the Lord from a humble state to a glorious one: which [Marginal note: Ezekiel.] John does not express, but hints at, when he says: Prepared by God, as [Marginal note: John.] a bride adorned for her husband. Therefore, the Lord is introduced by Ezekiel in such words complaining about the synagogue, which after such noble ornaments had fallen into many crimes: from which ornaments, described metaphorically, we will easily be able to understand those ornaments with which she herself will be clothed for the supreme prince and the Lamb, perpetually to be espoused in those very nuptials, concerning which John says, 'Let us rejoice and exult, and give glory to God: for the marriage of the [Marginal note: The same.] Lamb has come, and his wife has prepared herself; and it was granted to her to be clothed in shining and white fine linen, for the fine linen is the righteous deeds of the saints.' And John does not proceed further concerning the ornament: but Ezekiel, in a long discourse, recounts with what ornaments and gifts the former bride, the synagogue, was endowed by the bridegroom: and with what lamentations he complains of her ingratitude, saying: 'I made you multiply like the growth of the field,' which indeed cannot be numbered: just as the multitude of the blessed cannot. It follows: 'You multiplied and grew large, and you came to the ornament of ornaments:' for which we have 'woman's adornment:' for the ornament of ornaments is placed at the time of weddings. Your breasts swelled: those very breasts, concerning which in the Song of Songs. 'Your two breasts are [Marginal note: Song of Songs.] like two fawns, twins of a gazelle, or a hind, which feed among the lilies, until the day breathes and the shadows incline.' Indeed, hinds and gazelles are exalted, by which he adjures all the daughters of Jerusalem not to awaken the beloved. Which breasts receive milk flowing and emanating from that land once promised, but now described by our John. To which milk Isaiah, in the name of the bridegroom, invites, saying: 'Come, and buy wine and milk without any exchange.' [Marginal note: Isaiah.] And concerning her who does not have this milk, nor breasts, that is, the capacity to receive it, the bridegroom complains in the Song of Songs, saying: 'Our sister is little, and she has no breasts.' [Marginal note: Song of Songs.] Blessed therefore are those who have those full breasts, which are better than wine. Hence, for a great gift, he brings forth that: 'Your breasts swelled full of that milk, which he who sucks knows how to reject evil and choose good.' And your hair grew: that indeed, which in Nazirites is not shaved, but grows, and is counted with all the hairs, which are numbered. But it is exceedingly damnable that with breasts swollen with that heavenly milk, and with flourishing hair, that is, with increasing vigor and strength of youth, she was naked, and

--- Page 1003 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

full of confusion. Therefore, the most opulent giver, taking pity, said: "And I passed by you,
[Marginal note: Cantic.] and I saw you: And behold, your time was the time of lovers. Therefore, I also wished to offer
the greatest pledge of love, giving myself to you, and bearing upon myself all
your crimes, covering them, lest your ignominy appear, whence it follows: 'I spread out my
mantle, or my wings, over you: and I covered your ignominy,' so that concerning you also the
[Marginal note: Dauid.] prophet might say, 'Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.'
It follows: 'And I swore to you, and I entered into my covenant with you, and you became
for me, namely, a bride,' a betrothal having been made in baptism on the part of the soul, but in many
[Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] places of the Gospel on the part of the bridegroom saying: 'I give eternal life to my sheep:
And whoever eats of this bread will live forever:' and, 'Come, blessed of my Father,
possess the kingdom prepared for you.' But not even thus, covered and sworn, does he wish to be joined,
unless she is washed and adorned: whence it follows: 'And I washed you with water,' namely, the heavenly water
of which we spoke before: 'And I cleansed your blood from you,' that is, your precept
and your work according to the flesh and blood: from which, unless one
is cleansed, he cannot be joined to the bridegroom, nor become the city of God, nor enter into it,
[Marginal note: Isaias.] as Isaiah testifies with an open voice, saying: 'Holy shall everyone be whose name is written
in the book of life in Jerusalem. And this, if the Lord shall wash away the filth of the daughters
of Zion, and the blood of Jerusalem from its midst, in the spirit of judgment, and in the spirit of ardor.'
The spirit of judgment pertains to the Son: to whom the Father gave all judgment: but the spirit
of ardor belongs to the Holy Spirit: who appeared to the disciples in the form of fire.
[Marginal note: Cantic.] But after the washing follows the anointing, concerning which it is inserted: 'And I anointed you with oil,'
namely, of charisms and divinity. Coming then to the adornment, he first says:
'And I covered you with רקמה ricmah,' that is, with variegated colors, or Phrygian work, which we
[Marginal note: Psalm.] can call 'recamo' (embroidery) according to our vernacular language, just as we read in the psalm:
'In clothing of gold, surrounded with variety.' Indeed, the synagogue was clothed with many colors,
to which God gave many kinds of sacrifices, very many precepts,
and various ceremonies. The soul is also clothed with diverse colors, and various garments,
[Marginal note: Paulus.] concerning which the apostle says: 'Put on bowels of mercy, kindness, humility,
meekness, patience, and other virtues.' 'And I shod you with תחש tahas,'
which Theodotion and Jerome translated as 'hyacinth,' with which the priest was shod
and clothed: And it is of an airy color: through which (as Philo says, and
[Marginal note: Ph. He.] commonly the Hebrews) heavenly and supernal things are signified. Therefore, those about to enter the heavenly
city ought to be shod with this, the affections being signified by the feet. 'And I girded you
with byssus,' as priests were girded, and also oriental women: who for their adornment,
besides their stockings, have undergarments, or girdles, or very precious breeches,
with which they gird their loins: To this byssus I would not dare to apply any interpretation except that of John,
[Marginal note: Ioannes.] who was taught by the same spirit as Ezekiel: for he added this, 'byssus are the justifications of the saints,'
with which all who are to be led there ought to shine. 'And I clothed you with משי messi,'
that is, with fine linen, or "trichapto" (triple-woven), as the Septuagint interpreted it.
And it is the finest silk in the warp, and sub-

--- Page 1004 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 431

covering, as Jerome says. And what is more subtle than those speculations which are made [Marginal: Hieron.]
by the more sublime theologians of both testaments concerning the most recondite mysteries of the
law and the gospel? And I adorned you with beautiful ornament, namely, beautiful in itself, and suited to the most beautiful
bride. But coming to particulars, he says: 'And I put bracelets on your hands,' that is, a gift, or the grace of working well, without which [Marginal: Cantic.]
nothing is done. 'And I put a necklace, or a cluster, upon your breast' as a sign of sovereignty
and dominion, which I gave to you over all creatures, when I said, 'Have dominion.' And
'I put an earring, or a small wheel, or a circle, or a gem upon your nostrils,' which in Hebrew is called נזם nezem;
and it is translated in various ways, and broadly in legal contexts; but it is an ornament of the nose, which is placed in the nostrils.
But concerning the ornament of the ears, he continues saying: 'And a ring in your ears.'
All of which oriental women still use.
Nor content with the sovereignty bestowed and denoted by the necklace or cluster,
the bridegroom also continues concerning the crown, saying: 'And a crown תפארת tipheret on your
head,' where our translation has 'crown of beauty.' But that tipheret denotes the highest beauty,
from which all beautiful things (come), and by which especially man is called the most beautiful work of God.
And it is the glory of God's majesty, to which we all strive. And the apostle was expecting this
crown, when he said: 'Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will render to me on that day; not only to [Marginal: Paulus.]
me, but also to all who have loved his appearing.' And concerning anyone going forth to the
kingdom of the heavenly city, prepared from the foundation of the world, that saying of the prophet
is spoken: 'You have placed on his head a crown of precious stone.' And to show the opulence
of riches and glory, he adds: 'And you were adorned with gold and silver.' Than which nothing more
suitable is found in lower things, by which the luxury of that adornment
and the heavenly treasure can be expressed. For gold (as Jerome understands) signifies [Marginal: Hieron.]
gifts of the heart, graces, and charity; but sonorous silver, gifts
of understanding, and the beauty and harmony of eloquence. 'And I clothed you with fine linen, trichaptum, or [Marginal: Cantic.]
fine fabrics; and with embroidered work, or multi-colored fabric.' Which indeed is not a repetition; for
earlier he had said: 'I clothed you with garments,' namely, inner garments, which clung to the [Marginal: Hieron.]
body; and here it is understood of outer garments, a cloak, a pallium, and suchlike, as [Marginal: Hie. sep.]
Jerome and the Septuagint interpret; and also concerning the furnishings of the house, so that she is understood
to be adorned not only with bodily attire, and to have all the ornaments of women,
but also her coverings and beds are prepared with marital diligence and care,
so that before she came to the delights of food, nothing even in these things would be allowed to be lacking.
Therefore, he continues concerning food, saying: 'You ate fine flour, honey, and oil.' Either each one
by itself (as most believe), or by the mixture of the three, he hints at the sweeter
bread which descended from heaven, as others think, and it pleases Jerome. Where under
three names he indicates the sacrament of the Trinity: not that there is one substance
and another, but that diverse things figure the diverse properties of the persons.
For fine flour, which is the marrow of wheat, commanded to be offered in sacrifices in many places, signifies Christ,
and the marrow of that wheat, of which it is said in the psalm: 'He fed them with...' [Marginal: Psalmo.]

--- Page 1005 ---
CANTICI TERTII

finest wheat: Which, having died in the earth, brought forth much fruit. But honey, by which all things are sweetened, is the Holy Spirit: who wonderfully alleviates all distresses and sorrows by which those are vexed who rejoice in the holy spirit.
[Marginal note: David.] concerning whom the psalmist follows: "And from the rock, He satisfied them with honey." For this [Marginal note: CHRIST.] honey proceeds from the rock, Christ, who said: "He will receive from what is Mine and will announce it to you." But oil, strengthening all weak members, and communicating, and providing nourishment for light, by which also in the tabernacle of God the perpetual light of the lamp is kindled, is said to be fitting for the Father of lights. Therefore, by the influence of these persons, united nonetheless in one essence, every rational creature is truly adorned and nourished: Which, without their influx, is destitute in poverty and starvation, weak, deformed, and hungry. Therefore, with such great diligence, God required those three in offerings, namely fine flour, honey, and oil, so that, receiving these sacramental offerings, He might return certain divine gifts, accumulated with no small increase, just as Christ asked for water from that Samaritan woman, so that He might return from His own abundance eternal life: The soul, fed and made beautiful by this food and influx, it follows: "You have become exceedingly beautiful, and you have prospered in the kingdom: And your name went forth among the nations because of your beauty." For thus the Israelite people prevailed over whomever, while it stood in its beauty, indeed in the beauty bestowed by God: whence it follows, "You were perfect in My beauty, which I placed upon you," says the Lord. And because the prophet first prophesies concerning the synagogue, in which many transgressed: therefore he subjoins complaints, which God Himself makes concerning the fornications, debaucheries, adulteries, and idolatries perpetrated by that ungrateful people: Whence also He judges its crime more grievous than the wickedness of Gomorrah and Sodom. But if we wish to understand the true adornment of that bride, who is bound to the bridegroom by an indissoluble bond, through that figurative (description): then all falls, and crimes, and abominations are far removed, [Marginal note: John.] since in that city, and among those perpetually betrothed to the heavenly bridegroom, these things are by no means found, as our John says: "Nothing defiled or unclean will enter into it, namely into those most chaste bridal chambers: but outside will stand all the unchaste, sorcerers, murderers, liars, and whoever has been defiled in any way." Therefore, you have the adornment of the structure declared above, from gold, jasper, and various precious stones: And here you have the mystical adornments of the living city, built from living stones, or the adornments of the guests of that city: Nor can we express further adornment with our words.

Why John does not express adornment as Ezekiel does. Con. II.

And thrice the prophet Ezekiel and John compare the adornment of that city to the adornment of a bride prepared for her husband, since a more accurate preparation than that is not found: then also because the union of that city, or of its guests with the prince, is called a certain celebration and a connection of nuptials, [Marginal note: Ezekiel. Idem.] as John expressly says: "Let us rejoice and exult, for the marriage of the Lamb has come, and His wife has prepared herself." But Ezekiel continues this adornment...

--- Page 1006 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 432**

chiel, but John kept silent: and this because the former, speaking of a figurative bride, could borrow from this analogous adornment, from which he might describe that figurative worship. [Marginal note: Ezechie.] But John, since he treats of the true bride, now freed from all shadows, figures, and enigmas, often lacked words and images by which he might describe that true splendor and glory, which surpasses every eye and human intellect. Therefore, I now seem to have arrived at the goodness of silence, which (as Dionysius says) is in the hidden and inmost divine places: [Marginal note: Diony.] Where the glory and beauty of all things is especially in the contemplation of God, who is all things so eminently that nothing can be compared to Him. Hence, those who have attained that glory considered it better to be silent than to speak inadequately, and to fail through inept examples and words for so great a thing, or to wish to express those things which it is not lawful for a man to speak. Nevertheless, John left a way for contemplatives, by which they can pursue many things, while he says in a single word: "As a bride adorned for her husband." Than which adornment none is more careful, none more celebrated, nor any marital union more intimate. These things argue for the greatest charity of the prince of that city towards us, since he seeks us not as servants and handmaids, but as most beloved brides for himself, to be bound by the bonds of heavenly nuptials, concerning which we shall immediately discourse, God being our guide.

**SIXTH MODULE, LIGHT.**
**What light is in general. Con. 1.**

[Decorative initial P] After the adornment of the city, light is treated very elegantly: by which the adornments themselves can be seen, and those who behold them can be delighted in it, from which they receive all good things. For just as (as the Phoenicians teach in their theology, with Iamblichus relating it) [Marginal note: Iambli.] we receive all corporeal good things from the light of the sun without any intermediary, or from the planets and stars, to which that Phoebean light is communicated: so in the heavenly city, whatever good things those citizens have, they receive from the Father of lights, and from that sun who says: "I am the light of the world." Or from higher minds, [Marginal note: CHRI STVS Diony si.] who, acquiring stronger illuminations from the supreme light, afterwards illuminate the lower ones, as Dionysius, conscious of those mysteries, hands down. Concerning which light, however, when I have decided to say something, I shudder at first glance: because the most obscure of all things offers itself to me, which indeed, the more it shines, the more it is also contracted by a darker gloom, and enveloped in a denser mist, so that eyes not well purified are offended rather than enlightened. Hence, that supreme light spoke to Solomon, the prophets, and Moses himself in darkness, until their eyes, freed from lower darkness, could endure that light itself. Whence Moses, sometimes freed from bodily impediments, transcending the darkness, saw the supreme light and the good itself face to face: whence his face shone so brightly that the children of Israel could not look intently at his face (as Paul says) because of the splendor of his countenance. For descending from the mountain, he had from con-

--- Page 1007 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

the divinely shining face: although our translation has 'horned'. Which error arose from the similarity of the word. For the Hebrews say קָרַן (karan) for 'shining' and קֶרֶן (keren) for 'horn' with indeed the same letters, but varied points (vowels). But let us return to our subject. Many are there who cannot bear that light, just like that common people: whence it is necessary that a veil be interposed: otherwise, offended by their own darkness, unable to comprehend that light, when they presume to speak of it, they utter many absurdities. For some say, and think to prove, that light is not a substance: because it sometimes happens to someone (as an accident): and because it cannot be the specific form of any form: Which things are childish, and bound by Peripatetic laws: for we have from our John: that life was the light of men. But since life is called light, it is inferred that light itself is also a substance, just like life. We also have from Augustine, from the great Plotinus, and from Aristotle himself in the second discourse on the soul, that this light, which is seen by the eyes, is a certain corporeal form. This light (says Plato), after the matter of heaven and earth was produced, the Creator immediately commanded to be present: so that it might vivify, distinguish, and illuminate all things, lest all things be confused, but distinct. For this [light] is so clear that it makes

--- Page 1008 ---
**EIGHTH TONE.** 433

referring to them: The people who sat in darkness saw a great light. Concerning this, elsewhere, inspired by prophetic fervor, he exclaimed: Arise, shine, Jerusalem, for your light has come, and the glory of the Lord has risen upon you. For the glory of the Lord is no other light than this, which once rose in the world, and was begotten by the Father from eternity: This generated light, together with the unbegotten, brought forth the creating mind (says Mercurius), [Marginal note: Mercur.] that is, it produced the Holy Spirit, the artisan of all things: to speak in our manner. For this [Spirit] is heat, which, proceeding from light and splendor, exists as light itself: For those three most holy persons are like three rays existing in one splendor, as Dionysius teaches; [Marginal note: Diony.] yet these rays are not confused. Which we also prove in three lights, while we perceive the Trinity in the shadows emanating from those lights. But unity is present when they form one light and one splendor. However, the example fails, because those multiplied splendors of lamps provide a greater light, since by their termination one increases the light of the other; but those infinite supramundane rays cannot be increased; yet they communicate their infinite light to inferior beings as much as they please. In shadows too they are distinguished, that is, in the effects produced by them, since from the Father of lights we have being; from the Son, understanding; from the Spirit, warmth and love. They are also distinguished among themselves as light, splendor, and heat, which nevertheless are the same in substance: Not indeed qualitative splendor and heat (as logicians say), [Marginal note: Logici] but essential light, splendor, and heat: which subsist by themselves, without being in a body, and without emanating from a body: such is that divine light, splendor, and heat of which we speak: from which all life and all things emanate. This light John explained in a few words, [Marginal note: Ioannes] as is the custom of those who are closer to the light itself. For just as light, the closer it is to the shining and diffusing source, the more intense it is and less spread out. And the more remote, the more spread out and less intense. In the same way, those teaching it and diffusing it, the more they have approached it, the more intensely they understand, and explain it in fewer words. But those more distant from the light and doctrine, since they do not know well how to express what they do not well perceive, multiply words and entangle those listening and reading. Therefore, John, [Marginal note: Idem] being very close to that illuminating one, and reclining on his breast, received intense and less diffused light, whence he also expressed himself concisely concerning it. But we, being much more distant from that light, and acting with those sitting on lower benches, it is necessary that, just as we have received it through more rays, we also explain it to our inferiors with more words: yet pursuing those things which we have learned from John, admitted to the inner chambers of light, delivered in few but most sweet harmonies, both concerning the light itself and concerning those things which emanated from it and continuously emanate.

III

--- Page 1009 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**
How all created things proceed from light. Con. III.

[Decorative woodcut initial L]That first-begotten light, therefore, is unique, and vibrating within itself with a single and most simple ray, it offers a single idea to the divine eye. But according to the multiplicity of those who behold it, it becomes multi-faceted: And the more it descends, the more rays it seems to have. Which
Ioannes. John, embracing all things, says in a single word: "All that was made, in Him was life."
Augusti. "life it was," a creative life, says Augustine. And immediately he adds: that this life
was light, from which all things were made: which he calls by another name, the Word. There are also
Moses. those who believe that which was prescribed by Moses, "Let there be light," refers to angels, as the first lights emanating from God: through which, as through glass (as Iamblichus
Iamblic. draws from the Pythagorean workshop), that supreme light transmits its light into other lower things: And let them be, as it were, transparent, and the first intermediaries, the higher
angels beholding that light itself, by which all lower beings are illuminated in their respective degrees,
Dyoni. as it pleases Dionysius. But each of the lowest things [is illuminated] through a medium, or suitable media, corresponding to them, as we touched upon above. But each of mankind receives that portion of light whose nature is the medium to which it is exposed: or with which it is connected. For if the soul emanates from that supreme light through Seraphic intelligences, it becomes seraphic: and strives to reach seraphic mansions (by the auspices of nature, but primarily with God's favor and attraction). But if through Cherubic minds the soul receives the splendor of knowledge, having become familiar with that light, it strives to reach Cherubic seats: whose nature it has already assumed through the penetrating light: and so let it be said of any other orders whatsoever. For just as light passing through glasses of different colors also diffuses multicolored rays, namely red ones through red, green ones through green, white ones through white, and so it must be said of the others. In a similar way, the intellect, or soul, assumes that nature through whose transparency it passes. Nor is the transparency of spiritual light air, but spirit,
CHRI STVS. and intelligence: which can receive and transmit that light. And perhaps of these the supreme teacher speaks, when he says: "Their angels always see the face of the Father." And who are their angels, if not those appointed for their guardianship? And how are they suitably appointed, unless they have some affinity with those to whom they are destined? But since above we have equated all lower things with the heavens, and the heavens with angels, and angels indeed with that supreme light: we can easily understand how all things themselves emanate from the same light.

**How light illuminates. Con. IIII.**

[Large initial L]That light in the divine mind surpasses all understanding: so much so that there are contained those things which lie hidden even from the highest seraph, as
Diony. Dionysius says. But diffused in angelic minds, and received according to the nature of the beholding intelligence, it is divided into various [forms/aspects].

--- Page 1010 ---
...is made: and strives to arrive at the seraphic mansions (by the auspices of nature, but primarily with God favoring and attracting). But if, through cherubic minds, the soul, made familiar with that light, receives the splendor of knowledge, it strives to arrive at the cherubic seats: whose nature it has already put on through the penetrating light: and so let it be said of any other orders. For just as light, passing through diverse colored glass, also diffuses differently colored rays, namely red through red, green through green, white through white, and so it must be said of the rest. In a similar way, the intellect, or soul, puts on that nature through whose transparency it passes. Nor is the diaphanous medium of spiritual light air, but spirit,
CHRI	and intelligence: which can receive and transmit that light. And perhaps the
STVS.	supreme master speaks of these things, when he says: their angels always see the face of the Father. And who are their angels, if not those appointed to their guardianship? And how are they suitably appointed, unless they have some symbol (or affinity) with those to whom they are destined? But since above we have equated all lower things with the heavens, and the heavens with angels, and angels with that supreme light: we can easily understand how all these things emanate from the same light.

How Light Illuminates.		Consideration IV.

LThat Light in the divine mind surpasses all understanding: so much so that those things are contained therein which lie hidden even from the highest seraph, as
Diony.	Dionysius says. But diffused in angelic minds, and received according to the nature of the understanding mind that receives it, it is divided into various...

--- Page 1011 ---
CANTICI TERTII

Ioannes. Indeed enough, concerning whom John [says]: "Light came into the world, and men loved darkness more
than light: because their works were evil and darkened." Nor did they strive to
CHRI cleanse their eye: as not only Christ, but Plotinus teaches in his [work]
STVS. *On Beauty*: Pythagoras also, Lysides the Pythagorean, Democritus, Hiero-
Pythag. cles the Stoic, and commonly the Academics assert that a bleary eye cannot see
Stoici that light. Nor indeed (as the Eleatic Stranger says in *The Sophist*) can common
Acade. eyes endure the rays of divinity. There are also among men, though few,
Heliates. who strive to hear the heraldic voice of the prince of light, by which it is said: "While you
CHRI have light, believe in the light: Walk while you have the light: I am the light of the
STVS. world:" manifesting myself, namely, to those willing to receive me. For the divine light itself
shows itself to be contemplated, without which we cannot see divine things: because (as Dio-
Diony. nysius says) it is only right to ascend to heavenly things to the extent that the ray of
divine utterances will deign to reveal itself. But He himself not only reveals himself,
but also invites, mingling with us, who have received a small portion of light from the
beginning: and this [portion] is covered by the

--- Page 1012 ---
**VOLUME EIGHT. 435**

**How light itself kindles and excites. Con. V.**

[Decorative initial H] THIS light, however, not only illuminates, but also kindles; and through its splendor, separating, rarefying, and heating (as Avicenna [Marginal note: Avicenna] says), it separates the pure from the impure, the good from the evil, the beautiful from the deformed: destroying and consuming the former; perfecting the latter. But there is a difference between light and heat: For light remains in the illuminated object, yet illuminating and penetrating what is illuminated; Heat, however, passing into what is heated, mixes with it. Hence the Holy Spirit, whose role is to heat, is said to dwell in us and mix with us more than the Son, who is properly light. For He (the Son) taught and illuminated the Apostles, and ascended into heaven; But He (the Spirit), sent and destined by this light, descends, entering, inflaming, and remaining, so that one and the same spirit may be made with those whom He inflames, or they themselves one with Him. And if He ascended to heaven, He does not, however, abandon us; but is with us until the consummation of the age, vivifying and illuminating. Nor is He therefore said to be diffused in us, like the Holy Spirit, concerning whom the Apostle says: "The love of God has been poured out in your hearts through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us." [Marginal note: Paul] Which we can also prove in the sun, a sufficiently clear image of God: whose light illuminates us, but is not diffused in us, like heat. For when the sun recedes, or a person moves away from it, or a window is closed, light no longer provides splendor; but diffused heat remains for a time: Thus also charity remains in our hearts, even if that light does not actively illuminate.

Therefore, that light excites, which in its solitary nature is entirely separated from us, but sent through the Son as through rays, and through the Holy Spirit as through heat: which excited those ancient fathers through that enigmatic splendor: who nevertheless was the Son and wisdom of God, veiled in enigmas and figures: Afterwards, appearing in the flesh, He excited us with clear light, according to that of the Apostle: [Marginal note: The Same] "God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son: whom he appointed heir of all things, as to his humanity: through whom he also made the ages, as to his divinity." Paul continues: [Marginal note: The Same] "Who being the brightness of His glory." Behold therefore, that this light, this splendor, is the Son of God: who taught and excited the ancient fathers through various enigmas, and at last demonstrated Himself in the flesh with a clearer light. In the homeland (heaven), however, there will be a most manifest and continuous light for all, without any interruption, or overshadowing, or concealment under dark veils: And therefore John says: [Marginal note: The Same] "And there was no night there, for the Lamb was its lamp." Hence, sometimes the prophet implored the excitation that occurs in this pilgrimage, saying: [Marginal note: David] "Awake, my glory; awake, psaltery and harp!" for which we have: "Arise, my glory; arise, psaltery and harp," for עור (Hur) means to excite/awaken, not to arise. Therefore, he prays to that begotten light, which was the psaltery of the Old Testament, and the evangelical harp, and the glory of all, that it may excite him: since we are not excited from elsewhere, nor do we have exciting light from elsewhere.

**III iij**

--- Page 1013 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

**How this light amplifies and expands. Consideration VI.**

[Decorative initial M]ruly wonderful is this light, which at first offered itself as obscured, but as soon as it began to illuminate my eyes, it leads me to such spacious chambers, and so entices the eye of my mind by piercing through, that I cannot depart from it, even though I cannot fully conceive even its smallest portion. For it expands my heart to such a magnitude that I am unable to retreat, but I am compelled to run with loose reins into the path of its rays, when it has expanded my heart and my mind. Nor is it truly wonderful if that light amplifies and expands, since white color, which is a kind of opaque light (as we touched upon above), disperses and expands; and the purer this corporeal light is, the more it extends visual rays widely, lengthily, and broadly. But that light is always most pure, so much so that the more our inner eye receives it, the more it is purified. Hence, the wise who have purified their inner eye by faith and doctrine see more than the common people; and the purified simple ones see more than those entangled in human doctrines and cunning, as the true light itself says: [Marginal note: CHRIST] "I confess to you, Lord, Father of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to little ones." And prophets, having a purer eye of the mind, saw even more than the wise of this world. For in the pure splendor of light, the truly purified behold, as the same supreme light says: [Marginal note: The Same] "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." The vision of which light is followed by joy, as the same light says: "These things I have spoken to you, illuminating you, so that my joy may be in you, and your joy may be fulfilled." Nor can he feel this joy who is deprived of that light, as that good old man Tobias said: [Marginal note: Tobias] "What joy can there be for me, when I do not see the light of heaven?" Therefore, by this light, the heart and intellect of Solomon were expanded, so that he might observe natural things and discourse from the cedar of Lebanon even to the hyssop that grows out of the wall. [Marginal note: Moses. Paul.] Expanded by this, Moses gave the law of most divine wisdom. Expanded by this, Paul saw the secrets of God, which it is not lawful for a man to utter. By this, all the prophets saw not only hidden things, but also those things which were done in times long past, and those which were to be done after a long time. [Marginal note: Benedict. Francis.] By this, Benedict, Francis, and many others, whose eyes were illuminated, saw absent things and things remote from corporeal sight. Finally, expanded in this perfect amplitude, we blessed ones hope, where we shall behold all things we desire with clear and open sight.

**How this light gladdens and beatifies. Consideration VII.**

[Decorative initial P]inally, this most holy light gladdens and beatifies those things which it had already vivified, illuminated, aroused, and expanded. For those things which shine and are illuminated are joyful, just as those things which lie in darkness mourn. And since there is no night in that most blessed kingdom, therefore there is no sorrow or horror there, whence our divine John, testifying to this, says: [Marginal note: John] "And there was no night there, for its lamp was the Lamb." And the more that heavenly and divine light ex-

--- Page 1014 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 436

...excellent it is than ours, the more joy it brings to the mind contemplating it. Indeed, our eyes rejoice in that solar light; our soul rejoices, and the spirit itself, as if in a light most familiar to it, from which spirit and life, most similar to light, emanate. For the Father of all (says [Marginal note: Mercur.] Mercurius), existing as intellect, life, and splendor, created man in His own likeness, a partaker, namely, of light and life. Therefore, when man returns to the light akin to him, he rejoices much more than one who, having long sojourned abroad, returns to his own and desired homeland. And so much does our spirit and mind befriend light, and delight in being suffused with light, that when it rejoices, it seems to emit it; so that just as the spirit rejoices within, so outwardly it smiles with the face, and shines with a certain exhilaration. And the eyes, which are most friendly to light, shine, and in that smile they create a circular motion like the heavens, and they dilate. In those who mourn, however, on the contrary, they are constricted and darkened; and as if adhering to a center of darkness, they are fixed. For we rejoice in this light, as if suffused with the smile of heaven. But if that light were seen in angels (as happened to some), we would rejoice much more. But in that supreme light, the blessed rejoice so much, that the overflowing joy converts the body itself into a celestial nature, and makes it glorious, luminous, and clear. For the eyes of all the blessed, both of body and mind, now converted into the nature of light, permeable and shining, by a mere glance, impress rays of intelligence upon their companions, sparkling in both with that emanation. And this supreme light shining so abundantly and felicitously in all things, just as this Sun in the stars; and much more: for the stars of the blessed will pass into the nature of that sun, as the Savior says: The just shall shine like the Sun in the presence of their Father. [Marginal note: CHRI STVS] Hence, a better and more harmonious harmony and joy is born there, than arises in the heavens from their consonant distance and most orderly motions, with the stars corresponding from the due convergence of rays. For those converging rays of the blessed united in the supreme light produce a sweeter melody. Moreover, those citizens smile and rejoice in the light itself, which illuminates all things, however diverse; because, having now become children of light, they are converted in mind and body into the same light. All things also become beautiful by that light; which is so beautiful that, with all deformity put to flight, it brings a wonderful delight to those who behold and receive it. The blessed, therefore, now in that evening light dispersed into many things, now in the morning light collected in the Word, behold all forms gathered there in most sweet harmony. Now turning themselves to that one thing shining in the midday light, from there too they draw what makes them rejoice, perceiving especially in that light, whence all things become beautiful and harmonious; and whence comes the congruence and harmony of colors, tastes, smells, spirits, and all things. Therefore, eyes turned to that midday light are so absorbed, that those who were formerly celestial then become divine, having drunk the nectar of divine pleasure. Therefore, nothing remains that they can desire; because, admitted to those inner sanctuaries, they are completely intoxicated by the abundance of that light, which immediately fills whatever is in that kingdom. And this is what Peter says: [Marginal note: Petrus] He has called us into His marvelous light; which was first diffused into the Son, who is the splen-

III iij

--- Page 1015 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

of the Father: afterwards into Christ, the man, prince of the whole city: then into the God-like queen, where she shines more splendidly than the others. Then it passed to the angelic choirs arranged in due order, down to the lowest dwelling of that supernal city: so that in it, all who see the Father of lights may always praise and glorify Him.

**THIRD MODULE, DIVISION.**

**That the house and that heavenly family are divided. First Harmony.**

[Marginal note: John. Ezekiel.]
**W**e are most fully taught by John and Ezekiel that the city and heavenly commonwealth are divided into many parts: who describe now foundations, now gates, now streets, now suburbs, now the temple, now treasuries: into which that structure is divided. Thus also Paul openly testifies that the inhabitants are divided into several ranks, saying: "In the church, which is this holy ci-
[Marginal note: Paul.]
-ty, which we describe, first indeed He gave some to be Apostles, then prophets, but others Evangelists, others pastors, and teachers, for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ." To these ranks correspond distinct portions of rewards, dwellings, and se-
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
-ats, as Christ says: "In my Father's house are many mansions." And since these things are hidden from us, and Christ has been silent as to for whom they are prepared by the eternal Father, indeed, He even confessed that it was not His to distribute them, but that they are given to those for whom they are prepared by the Father Himself, we too shall revere in silence, except insofar as the Son Himself deigned to reveal to His prophets and intimates. We shall follow those who treat of such matters, considering first that if in this earthly house there is a varied division into diverse seats for guests and lodgings for travelers, no less should it be thought concerning the blessed and Heavenly kingdom, from which, without doubt, these lower things emanate. There, therefore, are eternal mansions for all, not succeeding one another through time, but now dwelling together, having been admitted as heavenly citizens and members of God's household. Some of whom are assessors and judges. But the souls of some are brides and queens: but of some, concubines and young women, with a mystery more sublime than sensible words can express. The rest, however, are distributed into so many ranks that I dare not pursue the series of things in any way: Nevertheless, we will subjoin a few excerpts from those who have been taught by divine oracles.

**Concerning the particular mansions and seats of the blessed. Harmony II.**

[Marginal note: Isaiah.]
**T**he first seat, therefore, is that of the supreme Emperor, which is sometimes described by the name of the whole heaven, according to that of Isaiah: "Heaven is my throne." Sometimes it is a particular throne, on which Christ also se-
[Marginal note: Paul. Stephen. John.]
-ats, as Paul, Stephen, and John testify in many places. For here (John) in the beginning of the most sacred vision introduces Him speaking these words: "To him who overcomes, I will grant to sit with Me on My throne, as I also overcame and sat down on"

--- Page 1016 ---
EIGHTH TONE. 437

my Father's throne. Concerning whom Isaiah also says: "I saw the Lord sitting upon a high and elevated throne: and the whole earth was full of his glory." [Marginal note: Isaiah.]
Before this throne stand seven spirits, as John says: "And to the seven spirits who are in the presence of his throne." [Marginal note: John.]
But first let us speak of the queen and empress of all: who, clothed with the sun and crowned with twelve stars, treads the moon under her feet like the sun, and she herself sits at his right hand: as the prophet, once admitted by the Holy Spirit to those inner chambers, addressing the king sitting on the throne, exclaims with these words: "The queen stood at your right hand in gilded clothing, surrounded by variety." [Marginal note: David]
She has the moon, that is, the synagogue, or the assembly of all the elect, under her feet: because she is exalted above all creatures. And she is clothed with the sun, that is, Christ, above all who put him on according to the Apostolic teaching.
Afterwards are the twelve seats of the Apostles, who will obtain a more worthy place than others, and a seat on the thrones of judgment, as the Prince says: "You shall sit upon twelve seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel." And when the twelve fathers of the figurative family correspond with these, 24 are formed: [Marginal note: CHRIST] because (as John says) "And around the seat of the Lamb, namely, there were twenty-four seats. And upon the thrones, I saw twenty-four elders sitting, clothed in white garments, and on their heads golden crowns." [Marginal note: John.] All of whom with mutual voices praised Him who lives forever and ever, and said: "You are worthy, O Lord our God, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for you created all things."
There follow the seats of the prophets: who (as the Apostle teaches) [Marginal note: Paul.] hold a more sublime place, yet after the Apostles, and the first founders, and the principal fathers of both families, the twenty-four so often celebrated. Among the first are the four major prophets: Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel, and the twelve minor prophets, and many others, of whom mention is made in the four books of Kings. These are therefore called by the Hebrews the books of the former prophets, because all of them are interspersed with the deeds of some prophets, beginning with Samuel, after whom Nathan, Ahijah, Elijah, Elisha, and many others flourished: among whom, without doubt, are many whose names and deeds are not written: and very many who were called sons of the prophets.
Next succeed the Evangelists, whom He chose from among His intimates in the order in which Paul instructs us. Who were figured (as it pleases Gregory and most others) [Marginal note: Gregory.] by the four animals full of eyes, also furnished with six seraphic wings. For they were full of eyes illuminated by divine light, so that they might describe the gospels in a wondrous way, consonant with the law: so much so that there is no apex or iota in the law that is not contained in the gospel by a wondrous artifice. But of these, it is not necessary to speak in detail. They also have six seraphic wings: because they were always carried by fiery love in their narration. And they extended their wings in six parts of that structure, namely, before and behind, to the right and to the left, upwards and downwards. Concerning which the Apostle says: "That you may be able to comprehend with all the saints (especially with the Evangelists, who fully wrote those things which pertain to holiness and perfect life) what is the length, and breadth, and height, and depth." [Marginal note: Paul.] For length is before and behind:
III v.

--- Page 1017 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

breadth is extended to the right and left: which are four extensions: Afterwards height, and depth, which complete the six. And this extension is according to the moral sense. In the natural sense, however, seraphim extend their wings to all the aforesaid parts: because their warming power is sought everywhere in length, breadth, and depth, just like the sun's. Nor are the seats of others mentioned by John, although there are many in the house of the eternal Father, and we are taught by Dionysius about many orders of angels, about which we have explained above.

Concerning the Merkabah, or tribunal of God, according to the Hebrews. Con. III.

[Decorative initial E] There also exists in the theology of the Hebrews the tribunal of God, which they call Merkabah: as we have from Ezekiel, and from diverse places of scripture, but explained by the doctors, especially in the book of formation, which is inscribed to Abraham: [Marginal note: Abrahā.] To which they say belong Ophaninim, Seraphim, angels of ministry, and animals of holiness. Which, because they are not in use among our Latins, no one doubts, will seem foreign, not to say inept, because they savor of nothing trivial at all. Nor do I think we should desist from this, but that I should touch upon some things worthy of knowledge, besides those things which we have touched upon above. Therefore they say Ophaninim are angels whose care it is to dispose the matter of things, so that form can be introduced. For matter does not dispose itself, since it has no active power: therefore it is necessary that it be disposed by an external force. Seraphim, however, they say are warming powers, by which life and form are supplied. The angels of ministry, however, are of many kinds, just as the ministries entrusted to them. But the four animals of holiness are concordantly mentioned by Ezekiel and John, namely, the lion, the calf or ox, the eagle, and the man. What these animals are, however (although diverse [authors] have understood diverse things in the allegorical and moral sense, as Jerome recounts in a long series on Ezekiel [Marginal note: Hierōn.]), we, interpreting the anagogical sense, will follow the ancient fathers, saying that these four are, as it were, kings of four kinds of animals. For among herds and domestic animals, the ox is king: among wild beasts, the lion: among birds, the eagle: And among all rational beings, man: who also holds primacy over angels, and this applies to both sexes. For in the male sex, Christ exceeds them, as Paul says: "Having become so much better than the angels, as he has inherited a more excellent name than they." [Marginal note: Paulus.] In the female sex, however, she who is said to be exalted above all choirs of angels: To whom it was said more particularly (as it pleases some wise men), before man was formed from the earth and Eve was extracted from his rib: "Have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the other creatures." But to what purpose in that tribunal are the lion, the ox, and the eagle? I say, that if all things emanate from Him, ought not all things also have their image and idea in Him, and be written in the book of the supreme God's reckoning? For if, as in the books of royal reckonings, and of good rulers, all things are noted, both men, and cities, and revenues, and whatever pertains to the kingdom: so also in the book of God (as the prophet says) all will be written. And lest it be contended, that ho... [Marginal note: Dauid]

--- Page 1018 ---
TONE EIGHT. 438

men alone are written there, he prefaced by saying: "My frame was not hidden from you, when you made me in secret: Your unformed substance your eyes saw." [Marginal note: Jerome] Where Jerome says: "Even the elements, from which man is composed, God knows before he is formed, and all elemental parts: but also He numbers the stars, calling all of them by name: He also numbers the sand of the sea, and the drops of rain, having in Himself the archetype of all these. Much more does He know the animals sometimes shown to the prophets, and contains their image in His most abundant court." And therefore John, [Marginal note: John, Daniel, Ezekiel] Daniel, and Ezekiel, who sometimes returning to us from that same court, reported that they had seen there horses, serpents, dragons, leopards, lions, calves, and various beasts. However, those royal animals are not without reason (as it seems to me) held more particularly as images and singular ideas of those things which are here, just as the insignia of individual kingdoms and principalities are held by the Emperor. And since these animals are in that kingdom, as are also their seats, and [the seats] of all those whose type they bear in this world. But since we do not have other things expressed by the prophets concerning the division of that city, and concerning the seats of its inhabitants, nor shall we, progressing further in this manner, come to the guests, through whom that division will be better known.

[Ornamental symbol] MODULE EIGHT, GUESTS.
How many guests there are in that city. First Harmony.

Beyond the threefold and unique supreme prince, and the queen, how many guests there are in that dwelling, who always sing together there in praise of the prince, it is impossible to define, as John says: [Marginal note: John] "I saw a great multitude, which no one could number." And concerning the seed of Abraham, to be saved for the most part, God said to Abraham himself: [Marginal note: GOD:] "Count the stars, if you can: So shall your seed be," which indeed will come forth from Isaac, who indeed was born not according to the flesh (says Paul) [Marginal note: Paul] from the slave woman, but from the free woman, according to the spirit through the promise, which things are spoken by allegory. This number, however (as Dionysius says), [Marginal note: Dionysius] transcending the faculty of human calculation, is known to Him alone, who numbers all the hairs of the head. Nevertheless, some are of the opinion that they have discovered the number of angels, and consequently of those who are saved: whom they estimate to be as many as the angels. For they say that in each choir, of which there are nine, there are as many legions as the number of units a legion itself comprises, by squaring the number of the legion. A legion, however, contains (as they say) six thousand six hundred and sixty-six, which number, if it is squared and multiplied by itself, yields 44,435,556, and these are forty-four million, four hundred and thirty-five thousand, five hundred and fifty-six: But collected from all nine choirs, it would be 399,920,004, which are three hundred and ninety-nine million, nine hundred and twenty thousand, and four: but we shall leave these as founded in mere imagination. Others, however, estimate the number to have been calculated from the words of Daniel, who says: "Thousands of thousands"

--- Page 1019 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

ministered to him: and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. And thus there will be in the computation already made two thousand thousands: who indeed some of our most recent theologians dared to assert, that ten times one hundred thousand are more than thousands of thousands: Which proceeds from complete ignorance of numbers and calculations. From none of these, finally, can we have a true computation of angels or of the blessed: For the former presuppose what they ought to prove: And those who rely on Daniel would indeed have a computation already made, if the prophet had declared that there are no more angels than those two thousand thousands. Hence, Jerome wisely and learnedly says: "Not from this saying of Daniel is the number of God's ministers defined, but human speech was unable to explain a greater multitude." For these are the thousands, and these the myriads,
[Marginal note: David] of which, as it is said in the psalm: "The chariots of God are ten thousands, thousands of those rejoicing, the Lord is among them." Therefore, the number of both, angels and saints, remains unknown to us: but known to Him to whom the drops of rain and the grains of sand are known. However, we do not doubt that there are three kinds of guests, namely, divine, angelic, and human. But first we will speak of the lower ones, afterwards we will say what those supreme ones accomplish among the lower ones with harmonious sweetness.

Concerning angelic guests. Conclusion II.

Angelic minds are said to be divided, namely, into those assisting and those ministering. But first stand seven spirits, to whom is entrusted the dispensation of the entire celestial kingdom and of hell: which (as they say) is beneath the lunar sphere.
[Marginal note: Theolo.] For these (as more secret theologians say) govern all things by a certain succession of hours, days, and years: just as it is said by astrologers concerning the planets over which they preside.
[Marginal note: John.] And of these our John speaks, when he says: "And seven burning lamps before the throne of God, which are the seven spirits of God," through whom, as through principal ministers, He distributes all things: both the higher things, which delight in the number three: and the lower things, which delight in the number four: and are composed of the four elements: from which three and four that seven is completed. And that they preside over the seven spheres, and consequently over those things which are disposed by them,
[Marginal note: The same.] John clearly indicates, when he continues: "I saw in the midst of the throne, and in the midst of the elders, and of the four living creatures, a Lamb standing, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent into all the earth:" that is, extended by power wherever, so that with eyes they may see all things, and with horns they may strike all things that are to be struck: for they stand in the sight of God, so that they may hear and grasp all things that the prince commands. But they are sent, and go, or are extended by power, so that they may execute the commands entrusted to them, either by themselves or through the inferior ministers of the celestial militia designated for their governance.
[Marginal note: Mercury.] Who (as Mercury teaches) were created immediately after the mind and the divine spirit. The Mind (he says), God, most full of the fecundity of both sexes, life, and light, with His word, created another mind, the artificer: which God indeed is the divine power of fire and spirit. He then created seven governors, who encompass the sensible world with their circles: whose disposition is fate

--- Page 1020 ---
TOMVS OCTAVVS                                     439

whose disposition is called fate. But as it says that the other artificer mind, which is the Holy Spirit, was fabricated, it is not understood to be composed of cement and stones, but produced by the Father and the Word. It is also itself a spirit, an artificer, and a craftsman, as we read in the book of Wisdom: "For it is the artificer of all things, having all power." [Marginal note: Sapien.] After this spirit, it says that among spiritual beings, those seven governors of the spheres and disposers of things were fabricated as most faithful ministers. And since this lower divine family has an image of the heavenly host and the divine tribunal, hence in the figurative description of both churches (namely, the triumphant and the militant), which is found in the book of Esther, full of mysteries, seven princes are described ministering to King Ahasuerus: [Marginal note: Heſter.] Who, having repudiated Vashti, his former wife, took Esther as his wife: whom for himself perpetually

--- Page 1021 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

To care for the earth and sea? And to whom it is given to prove how great is the faith of men in the Lord their God. Nor are there wanting those upon whom it falls to diligently care for us, defend us, guard us, and even undertake wars lest we ever strike our foot against a stone, except insofar as divine justice has decreed, perhaps thus our misdeeds demanding it: or that we may be proven with what strength of spirit we sustain the tempting Lord. There are also those who supply power to the smallest herbs, stones, and all lesser things: and finally, those who bring all kinds of ministry into the greatest house of God: Whose manifold offices transcend all human comprehension, and much more their number: Therefore no one presumes to assign it, except he who completely ignores those things which it decrees: To these also correspond innumerable unclean spirits existing in the lower and unclean crater, as many as there are clean spirits in the upper, as some assert they have received from oracles. Desiring to know these un-
[Marginal note: Sim Be.]
clean ones, that greatest Hebrew theologian Simeon Beniochai asserts, perhaps not inaptly as a joke, that it was shown to him that two hundred thousand unclean spirits resided in a certain censer:
[Marginal note: euangel]
And in the Gospel we have that a legion dwelt in only one man: who, expelled by the Savior, and He not unwilling, betook themselves into pigs, quite similar to their uncleanness: If therefore in one censer and in one man so many thousands are contained, let the wise infer in some way from this how innumerable is the multitude of the rest.

Concerning human guests.		Con. III.

<span style="font-size: 200%; line-height: 0.8; vertical-align: -0.2em; display: inline-block;">S</span>There are also in that super-exalted city human guests distributed and gathered with such wonderful harmony that any ordered lower kingdoms do not even reflect a shadowy image of it. For there is the prince of all rational creation, who is rightly called King of kings, Lord of lords, and Prince of the kings of the earth. There is she who is the daughter and wife of the eternal king, and also the mother of the supreme prince. There are also fathers of fathers, who are called patriarchs: who were the fathers of those who are princes in the new family of God, according to that of the prophet: "Instead of your fathers, sons are born to you; you will make them
[Marginal note: Dauid.]
princes over all the earth." between which parents and sons there is a mutual and most sweet harmony. There are also the foundations of both families: the proph-
[Marginal note: Paulus.]
ets who founded the ancient; and the Apostles, who founded the more recent, according to that of the Apostle: "Built upon the foundation of the Apostles and and prophets." And these are bound by a most sweet bond, and corresponding to each other with wonderful harmony: because the Apostles preached nothing other than what the prophets, taught by divine oracle, had foretold: Whose obscure and veiled sayings they explained and brought into light. Also present are the Evangelists, as if privy to the eternal king's secrets, depositing in the archives the deeds of the prince and his soldiers: And these are chosen from different orders: for Matthew was an Apostle, and Luke was from the disciples. There are also priests and kings of both testaments, all indeed anointed and

--- Page 1022 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS                                                                 440

of Christ the Lord: because they ought to be more divine than others. There are also very brave soldiers in very great abundance, who, faithful to their sworn oath, exposed their blood and life for the prince. There are also married couples, who by their matrimonial sacrament represented those heavenly and ineffable nuptials of Christ and the Church. Among whom are also admitted widows, who have already fulfilled the sacrament of their marriage: and all sing harmonious hymns to the highest prince, crying out (says [Marginal note: Ioannes.] John) with a loud voice, and saying, Amen, Blessing, and glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, Honor, Power, and Might to our God forever and ever. Amen. Indeed, he placed this eulogy almost as an introduction: and he added the same to the conclusion: so that he might connect those divine names of true dominion, which are contained under the numerical values of the letters of that word Amen. These hymns of thanksgiving they rendered, with robes cleansed and made white in the blood of the Lamb: But separately, those who have not been defiled with women, being virgins, sing that new song, which no one could sing, except those one hundred forty-four thousand, who undefiled follow the Lamb wherever he goes: and are without blemish before the throne of God. Nevertheless, each of their companies has its own mansions: which are therefore many in the house of the eternal Father. But concerning the particular songs of any of them, we will treat in its proper place (God willing). I omit that great multitude: which just as no one (according to [Marginal note: Idem.] John) can number, so too [I omit] their offices and mansions.

Concerning divine guests.                                             Con. IIII....

[Ornate initial E in a decorative square frame] There are also divine guests, from whom is all harmony, praise, glory, even being and living, and every good: and to whom all hymns and praises are directed. For from the Father they have that they exist, who praise: From the Son they know the measures, and the art of singing together, and the rules by which they move heart, hands, tongues, and all things, into true praises: since in Him are the rules directing all things: But from the Holy Spirit they draw breath, by which they render their voices sonorous. For spirits in that language which is called holy, and is proper to sacred eloquence, are named רוח ruah, which signifies wind and breath. For He himself gave [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] to the fishermen, and to all followers of Christ, breath, voice, and the ability to speak, Christ attesting to this, who says: For it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you. For He filled the boy lyre-player, and made him a psalmist: He imbued the shepherd of sheep, and established him as a lawgiver: He filled the herdsman plucking sycamore figs, and made him a prophet: He filled the fishermen, and made them Apostles and singers together: He touched the persecutor, and appointed him teacher of the Gentiles: He inspired the tax collector, and promoted him to Evangelist. He visits the unlearned and simple day by day, and they become most enlightened teachers: For it is the same Spirit, distributing to each, who works all things in all. And if, filling these strangers, He made them singers together for God, what will He do for those who are already citizens and members of God's household

--- Page 1023 ---
**CANTICLE THE THIRD**

2.
And if they are, will they never depart from that place and rank? No less does the Son continually impart from his fullness, so that they may have whence to grow: or at least persevere in continuous praise. And the Father, the most exuberant fount of all, gives so that they may be strengthened, moved towards God, and blessed, according to that saying of Dionysius: "All rejoice at the Father's prompting." Just as therefore all the blessed receive whatever they have from that Trisagion, so all tend towards Him, and look towards Him like lines to a center, from which they emanate. Which return to that very same [source] from which they proceeded renders a perfect harmony.

**MODULE NINE, THE MARRIAGE.**
*How, and when, the marriage between God and the soul was initiated. First Harmony.*

**I**ndeed, the sacrament of marriage is of the greatest importance, so much so that, with the creation perfected and its own high priest introduced into it, marriage was immediately celebrated: and marriage was ordained by God for our first parents: For the Creator, placing the final hand on his work, decided to give to man, now made, a helper that would stand before him, concerning which our text has: "He made a helper like himself." Hence, a deep sleep having been cast upon Adam, He took one of his ribs, and forming it into a woman, brought her to Adam, and assigned her as his wife: so that the human race, from the application of the active to the passive, might feel its own harmony: and might rejoice in a fruitfulness so much more celebrated than other living beings, as man is better than them. Therefore, Adam himself received this woman, formed from the rib of the man, saying: "This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: Therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to his wife." Which words Paul, quoting to the Ephesians, adds: "This mystery is profound, and I am saying that it refers to Christ and the church:" And just as sacred scripture, having recounted creation, first deals with marriage: In the same way, it will end in the sacrament of marriage, as John says, at the end of his most celebrated and final vision, while relating the person of the exultant blessed: "Let us rejoice and exult, for the marriage of the Lamb has come." And again: "Blessed are those who are invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb." Also, the prince and Lord of that city, while he lived among humans, compares the kingdom of heaven and the sum of all human endeavor to marriage. Since therefore the most celebrated of all marriages are conducted there, let us see who is the bridegroom, who is the bride, by what marriage song, by what feasts, by what contract, by what auspices they are celebrated. The bridegroom, there is no doubt, is He who says through Hosea: "I will betroth you to me in faithfulness, and you shall know that I am the Lord." Which bridegroom is more clearly expressed in the Gospel by Himself, when He says: "The kingdom of heaven is like a king who prepared a wedding feast for his son." Now the Son of the supreme King of all ages is Christ, and He Himself is king: for He has long since received the scepter from the Father. Now the bride is any soul consenting to this contract: And consequently the whole church

[Marginal notes:]
Dionysius.
Paul.
John.
CHRIST.
Hosea.
CHRIST.

--- Page 1024 ---
TOMVS OCTAVVS. 441

Church, and the collection of the faithful is the bride, not indeed superfluous and troublesome to such a groom, who will never be lacking in what is required for those nuptials. For from his fullness (says John) we have all received, [Marginal note: Ioannes.] namely, all things that are opportune in this and in other matters. For if he paid Adam's debt for all, if he merited grace and glory for all, if he covers the nakedness of all, if he regenerates all (for he himself is the father of all), he can also betroth all souls: and give them whence they may conceive and bear the fruit of good works, as the Apostle says: But God is able to make all grace abound in you: [Marginal note: Paulus.] so that you may abound in every good work, as it is written: He has dispersed, he has given to the poor: [Marginal note: Dauid.] his righteousness remains forever and ever. Now he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will supply: and multiply the seed you have sown and increase the fruits of your righteousness, so that you may be enriched in everything and abound. Therefore let no one refuse such a groom, as if he could not provide for so many brides: For he is rich in all these riches, which do not diminish when shared: And he is powerful with that virtue which, when communicated to many, is not emptied: just as neither the light nor the power of the sun, when imparted to many and fertilizing all lower things, is diminished.

And since marriage is initiated, contracted, ratified, and consummated, first we will see how, and when, it took its beginning. Therefore, these nuptials were initiated by the Holy Spirit, when, at his dictation, God so often invites us through the prophets to this contract: according to that which is openly found in Hosea: I will betroth you to me forever: I will betroth you to me [Marginal note: Osee.] in righteousness, and in justice, in mercy, and in compassions: for which in Hebrew is found וברחמים (ube rahamim): which we can interpret as, 'in benevolent loves,' or 'in pieties.' For under the Law, the severe groom betrothed in judgment and justice: but in the Messiah, showing himself most benevolent, he betrothed in mercy, piety, grace, and all blessings signified by that word 'rahamim': And through Ezekiel, inspired by the divine spirit, he says: And I swore to you, and [Marginal note: Ezech.] entered into a covenant with you, and you became my bride, namely by the consent which every soul readily gives, which by its very nature desires the blessedness encompassed by these nuptials. You have, therefore, how these nuptials were initiated, to which he first invited angels: But he found many of them unworthy: whence he also ordered them to be expelled as rebels and rash ones. He also invited all men, but most, immersing themselves in follies, and almost base and bestial things, unworthy of such great companionship, were not unjustly rejected and left to wallow in the mire of sordid pleasures. Hence, with them cast out, he called others to the nuptials through angelic, prophetic, and Apostolic heralds and messengers: who, all solicitous for our salvation, invite to those nuptials whomever they find at the ends of the roads, or at crossroads and the world's intersections.
KKK

--- Page 1025 ---
<center>
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**
How it was contracted. Con. II.
</center>

<p style="text-indent: 2em;">
<span style="font-size: 200%; line-height: 0.5em; vertical-align: -0.2em;">C</span>ontracted is marriage by words (as they say) of the present, an indissoluble bond among Christians; although it was permitted to those who lived according to the law to give a bill of divorce, which the Mahometans also observe. But marriage, which is by words of the present between spouses immediately assenting, differs from betrothals, which are made by words of the future, and by parents, or by intermediaries, and any sponsors, while the betrothed are still underage; who, when adult, often rescind such agreements. But the marriage between Christ and the soul, initiated by the prophets, is contracted by words of the present in baptism; when the one to be baptized asks for faith, and gives full consent, by which a true marriage is contracted. And because customarily they join right hand to right hand, this is represented by the sensible water, in which one is immersed, with the word accompanying; from these a sensible sign of this contract is provided. But the word is interposed, just as it is accustomed to be said in carnal marriage, "I want you as mine (wife)," and "I want you as mine (husband)," so here it is said: "I renounce the devil, the world, and its pomps, so that I may fully adhere to my spouse Christ." Who also confirms this kind of marriage by an oath, according to that passage of <span style="margin-left: 2em;">Ezechiel</span>Ezekiel: "And I swore to you, and entered into my covenant with you, says the Lord, and you became my bride." But when? Hear what he adds: "And I washed you with water, and cleansed your blood from you, and anointed you with oil." All these things happen in baptism. Of which, no one doubts, the prophet speaks under the type of a figurative bride, who herself was washed with water, but not with that perfect water with which we are washed. But we are joined to Christ in baptism by an indissoluble bond and covenant, which no one is ever permitted or able to break without express adultery. Nor indeed did he ever repudiate any wife, even if he made a divorce from his once dearest spouse, the ungrateful synagogue, of course; as we have in the figure of Vashti, who, despising the royal command, deserved a bill of divorce. Hence also the custom had prevailed (with the law nevertheless assisting) that marriages were often dissolved. This is by no means granted to Christians, to whom <span style="margin-left: 2em;">CHRIST</span>it was said by the spouse: "I am with you until the consummation of the age, never to repudiate you, even if you commit a thousand adulteries, yet not with impunity." For, the indissoluble marriage with the whole Church persevering, every immodest soul will not unjustly pay the penalty of adultery, when it is expelled by perpetual <span style="margin-left: 2em;">The same</span>separation from the spouse saying: "Depart, you cursed, into eternal fire." Hence this universal bride, which is called the Catholic Church, will never be repudiated. But if a particular one is rejected, another will be brought in, so that that number may be full, by which this betrothal assembly is concluded. For in Job it had been foretold: "God will crush many, and will make others stand in their place." And in Revelation: "Hold fast what you have, lest another take your crown." Nor are these repudiated by the spouse, except insofar as they themselves despise
</p>

--- Page 1026 ---
**VOLUME EIGHT.** **442**

to come to the most blessed nuptials, either rejecting them or even neglecting to attend them, as it is said in the Gospel: "And those who had been invited were not worthy." Therefore, others are introduced so that the nuptials may be filled, the groom persevering in this intention, that he may have this congregation as his bride, rejecting none of that congregation, except those who have scorned to come voluntarily or to remain. But he so rejected the former bride that he admits no one from that assembly to the nuptials, unless he flees into the bosom of this new bride, having become a Christian. And so that we may return to the sacrament of the first parents, the wife of the first-formed man was called Virago, because she was taken from man: and this assembly is called Christian, because it is taken from Christ. That one from the rib of man, and this one from the side of Christ: from whom (says **Augustine**) all sacraments emanated, especially baptism: which had its efficacy from that blood and water: or from that which that blood and water signified. And since this wife is formed in baptism, we can rightly say that she was extracted from the side of Christ sleeping. And just as those two, and all married people (as the Gospel testifies), come together into one flesh, so Christ and his spouse, universal or particular, come together into one spirit, as **Paul** says: "He who is joined to the Lord becomes one spirit with him."

**How it is ratified. Con. III.**

**C**arnal marriage is confirmed and held valid before the priest: who exists as a witness and minister of that sacrament: So also this spiritual betrothal is ratified before the Bishop, from whom we receive the sacrament (as they say) of confirmation: because the covenant and the oath made in baptism are confirmed. It is also called the sacrament of chrism: because the recipient is anointed with a particular anointing of divinity. Also, the nuptial covenant contracted in baptism is confirmed and ratified whenever we receive the sacrament of confession or the Eucharist: or are endowed with any other gift by Christ the groom. But we receive true confirmation when we are so solidified in the grace of God that we may complete the course of this life in it: for which reason no divorce is to be feared by us in the future. Which confirmation the **David** prophet desired, saying: "And confirm me with a principal spirit:" or with a willing, liberal, generous, or munificent spirit: For that is what נדיב (nedib) signifies, which we have translated as "principal." The prophet also foreseeing what the groom was about to do with his bride, the Church, prays and says: "Confirm this, O God, which you have worked in us, from your holy temple which is in Jerusalem," or this lower (Jerusalem), where he celebrated this covenant on the cross, and confirmed it by the infusion of the Holy Spirit: or in the heavenly Jerusalem, where these most celebrated and whatever other nuptials are completed, **CHRIST** saying: "What God has joined together, let no man separate." If God therefore effects these marital conjunctions and unions, let them be made in heaven, where He himself dwells. Whence we ask to be confirmed (says **Jerome**)
KKK ij

--- Page 1027 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

because we are weak.

How it is consummated.

--- Page 1028 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 443

sustaining, vivifying, and gladdening, which is wine, always bestowing from its Phoebean nature, unless the receiving subject is ill-disposed, or more is consumed than was suitable. Likewise, for spiritual man, he prepared food under the species and name of bread, than which no natural food is considered more suitable to which it could be compared, or from which it could be named. Therefore, that heavenly ambrosia, and most sweet manna, now hidden, but then manifest, food indeed filled with all sweetness, he called bread, saying: "I am the living Bread who came down from heaven; if [CHRI STVS.] anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever." How beautifully, and how suitably, is the bread of life prepared for the sustenance and life of the members of Christ: so that they may live by the spirit and by the life of Christ: so that what the A- [Paulus.] postle says may follow: "We are all one body and one bread, who partake of one bread and of one cup." For just as from many grains one bread is made, so from many members of believers one body of Christ is formed, living entirely by the life of Christ, indeed, by that life which is Christ. Therefore he said: "Whoever eats this bread [CHRI STVS.] will live forever." And again: "Whoever eats me, he himself will live because of me." And just as nothing is better, nothing easier, and nothing more suitably changed into our body than bread: In a similar way, so that we may be changed into Christ, this food is given to us, which he who eats does not change it into himself, but he himself is changed into the food eaten (for Augustine says) so that he may live in it. Therefore, whoever wishes to live, has where he may live, and from [Augusti.] where he may live: Let him believe, let him approach, let him eat, let him be incorporated, transformed, and endowed with new life, so that he may at last eat that new food: and drink new wine: Those who taste these things will thereafter be subjected neither to bodily nor to spiritual death. And that is the true bread of life, and the true hidden manna, which no one knows, except he who receives it: whence it cannot be taught by another concerning it, except by experience and taste provided by the author of grace.

Concerning wine. Con. II.

[V]ine indeed he offered us something wonderful in the Last Supper: yet promising something better in our resounding kingdom, and in the heavenly nuptials, while he says: "From now on I will not drink of this fruit [CHRI STVS,] of the vine until that day when I drink it new in the kingdom of my Father." Since therefore we speak of that kingdom, and of those nuptials, it must also be explained by us, what that wine is, which is promised to be given there. Wine indeed is pressed from the grape, and is born from the vine: Nor can it come from any other vine than from that one, of which he said: "I am the true vine." [Idem.] And it is prepared in those heavenly nuptials, which were prefigured by those nuptials, in which the heavenly bridegroom, first showing himself above man, and above the order of nature, immediately made wine from water, and by a mere command: which nature does with an interval of time, and by suitable means. Lest therefore those nuptials, which you had established to be consecrated as a sacrament of the true ones

KKK iij

--- Page 1029 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

B. The wedding, which would have been sad and tasteless without wine, the Most Pious Mother, spontaneously pitying human weakness and need, said to her Son, the true vine: "They have no wine." But since Jesus was not present at true nuptials, but at alien ones as an outsider (CHRISTUS), therefore He said: "What is it to me and to you, woman, since these are not our nuptials? My hour has not yet come, when, namely, true nuptials are prepared for me, the true bridegroom." But the Mother, caring for these figurative nuptials, and anxious for them with maternal authority, and conscious of the Son's will, said to the ministers: "Whatever He tells you, do it." And the Evangelist says, he himself not ignorant of heavenly mysteries: "And there were six water jars placed there."

These water jars, Jerome (Hieron.) in his commentary on Ezekiel, and some others elsewhere, interpret as six ages, as vessels capable of holding water both super-mundane and inferior: Which water, if it passes through Christ, the true vine, with the super-mundane sun boiling it down, is converted into good wine, which that figurative transformation signifies. But if the water jars are filled only with inferior water, that is, with graces which they call "freely given," then, with the evil heat of concupiscence boiling, they are often converted into wine, concerning which Moses (Moſes.) says with indignation in the Canticle: "Their vine is from the vineyards of Sodom, and from the suburbs of Gomorrah: Their grape is a grape of gall, and their cluster most bitter. The venom of dragons is their wine, and the incurable poison of asps."

With this wine, that great harlot, that is, worldly concupiscence, has made all nations drink: Therefore, that wine is said to have come from the vineyards of Sodom and the suburbs of Gomorrah: which, just as they burned with their most wicked concupiscences, so also they burned with the fire of divine justice. And this is the vineyard of the lovers of the world, whose grape and cluster is most bitter gall: because it is bitter to have abandoned the Lord for concupiscences. Hence, one must lament bitterly twice, as Jeremiah (Ierem.) says in Lamentations to his people enveloped in worldly affections: "Make for yourself the mourning of an only son, a bitter lamentation." And Hezekiah (Ezechie.), realizing to what this wine had led him, said: "I will recount to you all my years in the bitterness of my soul." And this worldly wine is rightly called the gall of dragons, because it was offered by the dragon, and the ancient serpent, for our irreparable ruin, whence it follows: "And the incurable poison of asps," that is, by human strength, without the help of the heavenly redeemer.

And to this corresponds the most bitter wine of divine judgment, concerning which the prophet David (Dauid) says in the psalm: "A cup in the hand of the Lord, full of pure wine, mixed, or with a mixture:" because the Lord Himself has dominion and judgment, power and justice, to reward the good and punish the wicked. And He poured out, or made it overflow (for which our translation has "inclined"): "It overflowed, and the malice of the one committing evil overflows upon his own head," thus divine justice decrees. Nevertheless, all the wicked of the earth shall drink its dregs: for the good taste the wine of divine justice, but sinners and the wicked drink the dregs. But let us return to those who drink good wine here, for a better and heavenly refreshment. Therefore, the wine which to drink here...

--- Page 1030 ---
**EIGHTH TONE.**        **444**

Therefore, the wine which we must drink here is twofold, namely, of charity and wisdom: Not, of course, that higher wisdom which in sacred scripture is called milk, as we have declared elsewhere: Which is given to few, but wine to many. And to this we are also invited in the Canticles where [Marginal note: Canticles of David.] it is said: "Drink, friends, and be inebriated." And again through the prophet: "How glorious is my inebriating cup:" Which cup, offering and pouring out on the day of Pentecost, so inebriated the disciples that some of those who were present said that they were drunk. Indeed they were drunk, and full of that wine which truly gladdens the heart of man, which in Greek is called 'paraclete,' that is, 'comforter.' Peter, tasting a little of this wine on Mount Tabor, was so joyful that he said, "Lord, it is good for us to be here." Paul had also tasted it, who said: [Marginal note: Paul.] "I desire to depart and be with Christ:" that I may drink that better and new [wine] in the house of His Father. Stephen had also tasted how sweet it was, whence, inebriated, the stones of the torrent with which he was being stoned, were sweet to him. And the prophet had drawn it, who [Marginal note: David.] exultantly cries out: "Taste and see that the Lord is sweet." The Apostles and all the martyrs had tasted it, so that, full of drunkenness and fervor, they themselves, exulting, swiftly ran to death, that they might more quickly taste that better [wine], to which they were animated by the sweetness of this lower [wine]. Wine is also the blood of the Lamb, [Marginal note: CHRIST.] who was shed for us: To drink which, the Lamb Himself invites all, saying: "Take and drink from it, all of you: For this is the chalice of my blood, of the new and eternal testament, which shall be shed for you and for many unto the remission of sins: Do this in commemoration of me, and in memory of the better wine prepared in the house of the Eternal Father." So that you may be made capable of drinking this, behold, I turn this wine into my blood, full of that life which I bestow together with the blood: so that you also may live that life by which you can drink that which no one drinks unless he lives a heavenly life. And this is what He said: "I appoint, namely through my passion and my shed blood, a kingdom for you, just as the Father appointed for me: that through this bitter passion and transformation to another way of living, I may approach that symposium in which is drunk the wine of perfect beatitude emanating from the true Bacchus and the true Sun." Hence He said to the Apostles asking to sit with Him: [Marginal note: The Same] "Can you drink the cup which I am about to drink?" Clearly implying that whoever wishes to approach that heavenly banquet must drink the cup of passion, denying himself and transforming himself through the death of the true cross, so that he may follow JESUS going by this way to that banquet. These, then, are the cups, these are the wines to be drunk by us here: wisdom, charity, mortification, and the transformation of oneself into a heavenly life: so that we may be able to drink the wine to be served there, and celebrate true bacchanalia, and lead true dances, and give and return true nuptial embraces, where two, that is, every blessed creature, will be united in one spirit with Christ and God to whom it has adhered: from whom it will no longer be able to be separated in any way. Then it will be permitted to plant true kisses, and to enjoy all delights with impunity, since nothing is forbidden, nothing prohibited to those who are joined in a true and most holy union: because there no-
                     KKK iij

--- Page 1031 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

any vice to which the blessed one might yield or be subject, who will be (as Augustine says) perfect in most peaceful virtue and condition.

What bread, and what flesh.                                        [Banquet III.]

[Decorative initial C containing a figure] Since we have spoken above of bread alone, now it must be seen how bread, having become flesh, is given to us in the banquet of the heavenly nuptials, just as the bridegroom said: "The bread which I shall give, is my flesh for the life of the world." And what is it that he says, "bread is flesh"? For bread is eaten so that it may be transmuted into flesh, and become flesh. But since this heavenly bread is not transmuted, but transmutes the one eating it, we eat this bread so that we may be transmuted into the flesh and body of Christ, and become two in one flesh, so that the true Adam may say of us: "Bone now of my bones, and flesh of my flesh." Therefore we eat this bread, by which we are transformed into the body and flesh of Christ, when we receive his doctrine, which is the bread of life and understanding, and is the water of saving wisdom; and also when we duly eat the very body of Christ. But no nourishment and transmutation occurs through any of these, unless that fire of the Holy Spirit and love is present, by which the food may be prepared before we receive it, so that we do not receive it out of habit, or hypocrisy, or any other indirect cause, but with sincere love and affection. By which fire also we may prepare and digest the received food. For then a true transformation [Academics, Epicureans] will be effected in us by the fire of love, which (as the Academics, Epicureans, but most especially [Dionysius] our Dionysius teaches) transmutes the lover into the beloved. Therefore the flesh especially prepared in the heavenly nuptials is the flesh of our bridegroom, and of the immaculate Lamb [CHRIST] sacrificed for the life of the world. And besides this flesh, in the Gospel, where the heavenly nuptials themselves are discussed, mention is made of certain other meats by the bridegroom saying: "My oxen, and fatlings killed," that is, the magnitude of doctrines through oxen (as [Jerome] Jerome understands it) and the profundity of God's doctrine through fatlings. But the wise [Hebrews] Hebrews say that God prepares for the just in the banquet an ox, a bird, and a fish: of the first of which Christ makes mention. For the ox is our animal, which was purged by the legal ox: The bird is that supreme portion of the soul, which by flying always seeks high things, interpreted elsewhere by Jerome as the eagle: But the fish, which is nourished in the waters of the spirit, is our middle or rational part: which is nourished and delighted in the waters of wisdom and doctrines. And all these things are prepared in that banquet to be eaten by the bridegroom and the guests, just as he himself says in the [Apocalypse] Apocalypse: "I will sup with him, and he with me." He certainly delights to sup with us, not because he needs our goods, but so that by eating, he may change us into himself, so that we may become one and the same with him, eaten by him, digested, and nourished into his body. But [Ezekiel] Ezekiel touches upon fish, saying: "There will be very many kinds of its fish, like the fish of the great sea": because there will be multiple, I will not say merely species, but genera of these fish, that is, of rational spirits and souls: which spirits will be assumed

--- Page 1032 ---
**VOLUME EIGHT. 445**

to that feast of uniting together with the bridegroom: Which fish Christ did not name at that prepared feast, but after the resurrection, having assumed the nature and condition of a spirit, he wished to eat of them, distributing them also to the disciples, as John narrates, saying: Jesus took bread, and gave it to them, and fish likewise. But Lu [Marginal note: John. Luke.] cas also says: And when he had eaten a part of a broiled fish, and of a honeycomb, taking the remains he gave them, saying: These are the words which I spoke to you while I was still with you. Therefore, this fish which Jesus ate after the resurrection is different from those which are born in the sea, since (as Christ testifies) its remains are the words which he himself had spoken to them while he was in human form: For spiritual words are the relics of the spirit itself, which we ought to preserve with much greater reverence than the relics of saints, in which their spirits also were.

Concerning the Fruits of this Feast. Con. IV.

[Marginal letter: C] Our harmonizers Ezekiel and John also narrate the fruits prepared for this feast: for Ezekiel says: On the banks of the river, [Marginal note: Ezekiel] which passes through the city, is every fruit-bearing tree: its leaf shall not wither, and its fruit shall not fail. It shall bring forth its firstfruits every month, because its waters issue from the sanctuary. And its fruit shall be for food, and its leaves for medicine. But John [Marginal note: John.] echoes the same as Ezekiel, but more clearly: because perhaps he had seen more clearly. He therefore says: In the midst of its street, and on either side of the river, was the tree of life, bearing twelve fruits, and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. Great are the mysteries here, and heavier than our weak shoulders can bear: nevertheless, we shall say something (with the Lord's favor). First, they concordantly recall the river passing through the middle of the city, concerning which perhaps the royal prophet [Marginal note: David.] says: The rush of the river gladdens the city of God. This river is the abundance of all good things flowing from that unfailing source, from which comes all good: which gladdens the city of God itself, and all its citizens. But the tree of life is that from which the promised and eternal life is supplied to them. But what these fruits are, which are said to be produced every month, O good God, unless you, who planted the tree, teach us, I would dare to affirm nothing rashly. Nor do those fruits of the spirit, which Paul mentions, seem to me to be the same: because they belong to travelers (on earth), and are not to be placed at heavenly weddings. And if that tree is the tree of life, which is the Son, those fruits would more appropriately be called fruits of the Son than of the spirit, although they could also be called fruits of the spirit: because they are spiritual, and produced by His power. Nevertheless, this tree is God the Son Himself, who, planted in earthly flesh, produced every kind of fruit. But mention is made of twelve principal fruits, because they are primary, and are said to be produced every month. And so that it may be understood what is signified by months and days (since in that eternal succession there is no distinction of years, days, or months), another meaning must be sought than what the letter sounds: in which that monthly...

KKK v.

--- Page 1033 ---
CANTICLE THREE

the monthly production of those fruits. We have said that the twelve Apostles are appointed over a twelvefold family, both figurative and true, which is divided: to the goal of the twelve celestial signs: through whose spaces the sun, running its course, distinguishes twelve months. Therefore, there are months in those eternal abodes according to a division of distribution, and not according to the courses of time, described by these lower divisions, as causes by effects, or true forms by pictures. Since, therefore, the twelve Apostles will preside over those families, whose marked and principal members are distinguished by twelve thousands: from this, the principal fruits of this tree of life are numbered twelve, and monthly: which primary and special fruits the tree of life itself produced as food, and for the shepherds of the whole family. Indeed, we have declared that the prince already set forth is food and nourishment, and that all of us are likewise. But the leaves given for the healing of the nations are those who preach for the benefit of others, and not for their own gain, as we have said elsewhere: or they are the sacraments given for the healing of all who are wounded or languishing through original or actual sin. For the leaves are, as it were, certain coverings in the type of sacraments, which cleanse sins and cover the nakedness of sinners. But those fig leaves could not cover Adam's nakedness, because they had not received power from the tree of life: nor were they leaves of this tree. For if Adam had taken of its leaves, perhaps he would have covered his nakedness. But God forbade, saying, lest perhaps he take of the tree of life, because it was not yet time to distribute its fruits or leaves: but when the fullness of time came, the leaves of this tree were distributed, and the sacraments dispensed for the healing of all the languishing: provided they are disposed with due contrition and turning back to God, as the prophet says: "That I might heal the brokenhearted."
[Marginal note: David.] Which is always done by the power of that tree, which is life, light, and the word, concerning which the Psal-
[Marginal note: The same.] mist says: "He sent his word, and healed them." And under these twelve fruits are contained all others, whatever they may be: just as upon the twelve foundations (as we have explained) all other things are built. And just as those twelve foundations rest upon the one foundation, who is Christ JESUS, so all those fruits emanate from that one tree of life, Christ JESUS, watered by the water flow-
[Marginal note: CHRIST.] ing from that sanctuary, from whom is every good gift and every perfect gift: and from whom the tree of life itself confesses to have received all things, saying: "My Father gave all things to me." In these fruits the bridegroom will delight, and the Most High Father will also delight, as in the offspring of his most beloved son. All those fruits will also congratulate each other, considering that they have proceeded from such a great tree, and have been placed at such a most celebrated banquet: these also (which is wonderful) will not only be dishes, but also guests, nor will any diminution occur from eating.

--- Page 1034 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 446
What abundance and sweetness of foods. Consideration V.

[Decorative initial C containing a seated figure] There they would by no means suffice, unless abundant; nor be good, unless sweet. These
two the divine lyre-player clearly expresses (as Augustine understands) while
he says, "They shall pour forth the memory of the abundance of your sweetness." For so [Marginal note: Dauid August.]
sweet and abundant are those foods, and they are devoured with such eagerness,
that the guests do not blush to belch forth superabundant portions. Although
some interpret "eructabunt" as "loquentur" (they will speak), it is better translated as "eructa-
bunt" (they will belch/pour forth), since that [Hebrew word] יביע (yabbia') comes from נבע (naba'), which signifies "it abounded" and
"it belched forth." For thus did the Septuagint interpret it, whom Augustine follows. Therefore [Marginal note: Septu.]
these most sweet and abundant foods are to be eaten in great plenty, after
the belching forth from abundance is sung by the prophet in commendation of those eating.
Nay more, we are invited to drunkenness by the bridegroom of the heavenly wedding, saying in
the Canticles: "Drink, and be drunk, my beloved ones," since indeed a good, [Marginal note: Cantica.]
pressed down, and overflowing measure has been given

--- Page 1035 ---
C A N T I C I T E R T I I
MODVLVS VNDECIMVS, INSTRVMENTA.
De primo instrumento qui est cælorum globus. Concentus primus.

[Large decorative initial Q]uite sufficiently have we already explained with what harmony the celestial spheres resound: But let us add this, that those ascending harmonies of the heavens resound in that whole celestial hall, where are the performers, namely their intelligences ruling them, which stand (as we have said) always before (Plato. Orpheus) the throne of God. And these, like Sirens (as Plato says), sitting upon those spheres, make their melody resound everywhere. But he makes them sound in the first place, to whom Orpheus said: "You tune the heaven like a melodious lyre." And that place is so tempered by harmonic proportions, that it renders the voices of those singing there much more sonorous than theaters or stages constructed with musical proportions, so that spectators might more easily perceive the voices of the actors, or players: who recited comedies or whatever else they presented on that stage or platforms: so that just as they were seen by everyone, both those in the orchestra and those sitting in the periphery of the semicircle, so their most consonant voices might be heard, with vessels resounding here and there, adapted with wondrous artifice for conducting harmonic voices. For art cannot surpass nature; indeed, it imitates it, and by long strides. Therefore, the harmony of the heavens is better than human constructions and instruments crafted by art. But beyond all ambiguity, it must be believed that among all the works of the supreme artisan, that is more beautiful and sweeter in which His throne resides: and the seats of all His banquets: In which not only is no dissonance felt, but all things are most consonant, (Augusti.) all joyful, all festive, all pleasant. Which (as Augustine says) David, learned in such songs, who had loved musical harmony not with common pleasure, but with faithful love and reverence, revealed through the mystical image of the thing itself, and through various rational sounds and moderate harmonies: and depicting the compact unity of the most orderly supernal city with harmonious variety, he sang it with many modes, various harmonies, and more secret mysteries of instruments, than is thought by the wise of the world. Hence, although some have applied their utmost industry to sing a psalm or hymn similar to Davidic odes, they are separated by a very long interval (begging their pardon) from our divine Lyre-player, who always seeks the sublime, to which he does not ascend unless carried by the same Holy Spirit, by whom he himself was inspired.

De secundo instrumento, quod est humana lingua. Con. I I.

[Large decorative initial A] tongue is necessary, assigned and ordered to song, which emits a voice, and that a sonorous one, by means of its instruments, which are the fauces, palate, teeth, lips, throat, lung, the spiritual artery, which they call the trachea: and above all, the pectoral muscles (Avicena.), which obtain the principle of this motion from the soul, as is held by Avicenna, and

--- Page 1036 ---
TONE EIGHT. 447

...from others who write about the disposition of the body. This tongue, even the bodily one, will be exercised in praise of the Prince, with the Holy Spirit testifying in David, who says: "The exultations of God are in their throats." [Marginal note: David.] For no distinct and sonorous voice resonates in the throat except through the movement of the tongue: for this [tongue] has been, or will be, restored to all bodies that have risen, or will rise, with all their arteries and instruments, in a much better harmony than anyone has had or could have in this earthly journey. For just as all members that were deformed, or distorted and maimed, will be repaired and perfected, so that everyone may meet the supreme Prince (as the Apostle says) as a perfect man. In like manner, also, what was previously a dissonant and discordant voice, or a lisping tongue, will be restored, polished and most harmonious, so that nothing base, nothing unseemly, nothing ungraceful may be seen there. [Marginal note: Paul.]

But since two media for forming voice and sound seem to be granted by nature (as those who treat of natural things say, namely air and water, in which elements sound occurs, though more aptly in air), it must be seen what water or what air there is in that supercelestial region, in which the voice can be established. [Marginal note: Physicists] This will be difficult to define by those who admit elements only in the lower regions, which are beneath the orb of the moon. But those who acknowledge elements even in higher regions (as touched upon above) will more easily determine this matter. [Marginal note: David.] For there are waters of which the wisest philosopher David [says]: "And let the waters that are above the heavens praise the name of the Lord." [Marginal note: Moses.] Moses had taught this same thing before, namely, that there are waters above the globe of the heavens, divided from those that are beneath it. And we have already said that some of the heavens are watery, and some are airy: For if the ninth heaven (which astronomers call the *primum mobile*, but some call 'crystalline') is watery, then following the order of the elements, we will say that the upper heaven, where the seats of the blessed are, is airy, yet with a certain solidity, so that the seats of the blessed and the throne of the Prince may be firm, as required by those who sit there, and all the guests now glorified. [Marginal note: Astronomers.] Nor will solidity prevent sound from resonating everywhere in a fluid transparency. And although some say that heaven is fiery, and therefore called empyrean (for πῦρ is fire), it is not so fiery that it is not also airy: whence others say that it is called empyrean more from its fiery splendor than from the nature of fire itself. [Marginal note: Theologians.] Certainly, sound will resonate there, as some of our theologians assert.

From this, it must be seen in what language, or in what idiom, they will speak. And as far as reason can persuade me, if they use any idiom, it is Hebrew: in which the law was given, the Gospel was preached by Christ, divine hymns were written, and all oracles were given, with the sole exception of that revelation which is called 'apocalypse' in Greek, written and delivered in the Greek language. [Marginal note: The same.] Then, because it is a most mysterious language in its figures, points, accents, and numbers carried by those letters: so much so that the more recondite theologians promise to explain everything from the permutation of letters and apices, and from the computation of numbers signified by the letters. Then, because those letters are said to be written in the seat of God, which is heaven: the letters themselves, which Moses first used in giving the law, are formed in the likeness of its figures.

--- Page 1037 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

as I remember having seen, if credit is to be given to ancient testimony. Moreover, just as this was the first language, and emanated from heaven, and existed before the confusion of languages arose in Babylon, so it will be the last (language) to be eradicated by that confusion, which was inflicted as punishment (as [Marginal note: Auguſti.] Augustine says) for such great rashness and pride. For this variety of languages is a very severe punishment, because of which no one can make known his thoughts or ask for necessities, either to a tent-mate or a traveling companion:
[Marginal note: Idem.] so that it is better (says the same Augustine) to be with one's puppy or horse than with a companion of a foreign idiom, because the puppy will understand what the other will not understand. Therefore, [Marginal note: Idem.] this language persisted either in Eber (as the same Augustine thinks) or in some pious family that had not consented to Nimrod's arrogance, who presumed to erect a tower into heaven so that, removed from atmospheric change (as is said of Mount Olympus), they might, with every impediment removed, devote themselves to contemplation and, elevated, surpass others beyond what nature provided. Nor was there ever lacking a pious family not assenting to such rashness, from which Abraham descended, who was first called a Hebrew in the sacred scriptures from עבר babar, which means 'to cross over', as we explained above. Therefore, just as this was the first language, always persevering unchanged, so it will also be the last in the homeland (heaven), if any vocal speech is granted: The sign of this is that intelligences, when they speak to men who know that language, use the Hebrew language: Although some assert that demons, or wise intelligences, use the languages of each of the nations with whom they dwell. But (if I am not mistaken) what we have said is more probable, since almost all authentic oracles have been delivered in that idiom. It is therefore most fitting that just as any victorious city imposes not only a yoke upon conquered peoples, but often also its idiom, so the Emperor of that heavenly city, and the attendant princes, will decree that all who are brought up there speak in the language and speech originating from there, and which the prince of that kingdom used to employ while he dwelled among men. Which perhaps (as we have said) will be before we arrive there, or at least after the future judgment by fire, according to what the Lord says in the prophet Zephaniah: [Marginal note: Soph̃. 3.] "In the fire of my jealousy, all the earth will be devoured. And then I will restore to my people a pure language, that they may call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him with one shoulder."

**Concerning the third instrument, which is our body. Consideration III.**

[Large decorative initial C containing a figure of a man]
[Marginal note: Auguſti.] We have stated above that the human body is ordered with the most perfect harmony, so much so that in no other body is it better and sweeter. Which Augustine says exists not only in those things which are outwardly apparent, fitted together by their numbers and measures, but also in those things which the human eye does not reach, derived with such numerosity and consonance, that no one could discover it, however diligent the investigation of anatomists might have been. Concerning which Boethius also says: [Marginal note: Boëtius] "That vivacity of reason in the body is mixed with a certain fitting together, like a harmony of grave and light voices tending towards a single consonance." Which (harmony), being brought together, man feels better than he understands, according to that saying of Zoroaster: "Man rejoices because of the harmony which he feels within himself." And what is more to be wondered at, it does not ha-

--- Page 1038 ---
**TONVS OCTAVVS. 448**

...the human body has not only harmony between its members, and humors with each other, and between the soul and the ruling spirit, but also between divine and supramundane things. Hence, by a great mystery, so many affirmative precepts were given in the Mosaic law as there are bones in the human body, namely two hundred and forty-eight; and so many negative ones as there are nerves in the same body, which are, not without reason, three hundred and sixty-five, by which number the days and nights of the year are comprehended; which, joined together, amount to six hundred and thirteen. This number is likewise yielded by the letters of the name of God אלהים if they are filled in a cabalistic manner, and the name יהו with one added, signifying that which results from both: For if the letters composing the name אלהים are filled, they yield 296, and the letters of the name יהו give 316, which, joined together, make 612. And that one, which results from them, brings the number to 613. Which indeed, according to the doctrine of those who theologize by numbers, denotes by a great mystery that the fullness of judgment contained under the name Elohim was given to JESUS, who said: "For the Father judges no one" [Marginal note: CHRI] after, namely, this transfer of judgment was made, "but has given all judgment to the Son." [Marginal note: STVS.] He who is about to judge all things again said: "For every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment"; much more concerning everything that shall have been done against precepts, both affirmative and negative, in all of which we ought to completely agree and concur with God. From which we are not exempt, since all those things are concluded in a brief, but mysterious evangelical word, in which the whole perfection of all precepts is absorbed, Christ saying: "On these two commandments, [Marginal note: Idem.] namely the love of God and of neighbor, depend all the Law and the Prophets." Whoever fulfills these will feel that which is said in the oracle of Ezekiel: [Marginal note: Ezechie.] "The bones came together, bone to bone, each to its joint." Those very bones about which the divine Harper [Marginal note: Dauid] sings: "Then shall the bones which thou hast broken rejoice"; and again: "My soul shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall be delighted in his salvation," to whom, namely, he harmoniously said: "All my bones shall say: Lord, who is like unto thee, who hast so well fitted all things by bringing them together, especially indeed the bones which seemed utterly scattered here and there?" And with these fitted together, Ezekiel continues, saying: "And I beheld, and, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon them," so that all members and internal organs, most harmoniously, may rejoice in the Lord. [Marginal note: Augusti.] Hence, in a magnificent sense, Augustine says that all the nerves and members of resurrected bodies will resound in praise of the prince of that city, and with a much better harmony, the more consonant men have been with God in observing His precepts and ceremonies.

**On the fourth instrument, namely the angelic tongue: Con. IV.**

[Decorative woodcut initial I] Angelic spirits are also present in those harmonies, concerning whom indeed we would doubt whether they speak in tongues and praise the Creator, unless Paul, taught in that heavenly gymnasium, and in whose breast [Marginal note: Paulus.] Christ resonates, were to say: "If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels."

--- Page 1039 ---
THIRD CANTICLE

Therefore angels have their own language, by which they speak both among themselves and with us, not indeed through vocal sound, but by creating a new concept in those to whom they speak, better than if it were expressed by an audible voice. But that instrument, by which one makes known to another what boils in the mind, whatever it may be, is called language: Which (as Plato says, and Aristotle agrees) [Marginal note: Plato. Aristo.] was given, so that by its auspices we might express those things which we have conceived in the mind. I also think that this should by no means be overlooked, that with our fleshy tongue we administer a twofold food, namely, a bodily one for ourselves, and a spiritual one for others. Concerning the first administration, Marcus [Marginal note: Mar. Va.] Varro says that the tongue is called as if 'binding food', for by rolling it around, it offers it to the teeth to be ground; afterwards, gathering it into a ball, it sends it down into the belly. Concerning the second, it is manifest how by the tongue we offer to others the food of the word of God: And what man does with a sensible voice, an angel accomplishes by impressing a concept. Whence just as John

--- Page 1040 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 449

to be imparted to us. When these things are thus revealed, corresponding to minds and affections, they sing, and praise God with the sweetest harmony: And sometimes they even emit a sensible voice, as they are remembered to have done at the Lord's ascension, to all who were present, these words: "Men of Galilee, why do you stand looking up into heaven," and the rest that follows, according to that of the Davidic hymn: "God has ascended with a shout, and the Lord with the sound of a trumpet," [Marginal note: David.] that is, with the manifest voice of angels, as Augustine and Jerome interpret in agreement. But with the terrible clangor of a trumpet, that archangel will emit a voice [Marginal note: Augustine. Jerome. Paul.] to summon all to judgment and the tribunal of Christ, according to that of the apostle: "With the voice of the archangel, with the trumpet of God," that is, an angelic trumpet, whose breath and power will be God raising [the dead]. Therefore, whether it be a sensible voice, or a rational power singing together and praising, it will certainly be most sweet.

Concerning angelic and blessed minds, which are themselves
resonant instruments. Harmony V.

[Decorative Initial P] Therefore, since the discourse of that heavenly homeland is conducted more by mind than by sound, minds themselves will be certain resounding instruments, producing a sweeter harmony than that which is produced by vocal sound. We can conjecture this harmony from those things which we continuously prove by experience: For when, concepts having been revealed, harmony is felt among those conversing, a certain delight filled with sweetness arises from that consonance: just as horror, weariness, displeasure, and pain are felt from the dissonance of voices, and especially of minds, so much so that from such things the odor of hell is perceived. Therefore, in that supracelestial chamber, where there is the highest concord of all minds, both divine, human, and angelic, with each other, and of all with the Prince himself, the highest joy will be entirely conceived, [Marginal note: Augustine.] which Augustine believes and asserts to be the cause of blessedness, which lies in consonant adherence with God, just as dissonance from Him is the cause of misery. And this is the true consonance, namely, of the mind, to which every vocal harmony, whether made by natural instruments, or that which is made by adventitious and artificially crafted ones, is directed, as to the principal instrument of all praises. Therefore, first of all, the minds of all the blessed sing the praises of the Creator with their high-sounding voice: because we can contemplate more and higher things with the mind than we can utter with the mouth: Nor is any melody more pleasing to the Prince [Marginal note: Augustine.] than the concord of the mind, in which He is especially delighted: concerning which Augustine, on that psalm, says: "Sing praises wisely:" He sings wisely who praises with the illumination of the mind, because no one does wisely what he does not well understand. For no praise is elegant unless it proceeds from the mind and heart. Hence, that which does not proceed from the heart is despised by God: as it speaks most clearly in Isaiah, saying: "This [Marginal note: Isaiah.] people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me." Therefore, the divine harmonizer, [Marginal note: David. Blessed Virgin.] to render pleasing praise to God, says: "I will give thanks to you, O Lord, with my whole heart." And the God-bearing Virgin, already instructed in heavenly songs by the Word she bore in her womb, intoned: "My soul magnifies the Lord. And my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior." For she joins soul and spirit in praise of the Prince and
LLL

--- Page 1041 ---
CANTICI TERTII
THE THIRD CANTICLE

Of the Spouse, by some most celebrated music, I know not what, other forms are of little account; full and most powerful praise has been discovered without doubt in our such harmony.

      Concerning the breath providing sound to all these instruments, which is the Holy Spirit and the divine Word. Con. VI.
[Illuminated letter E in a decorative square frame] NDEED, from the aforementioned instruments, none would resound unless the divine Word and the power of the Holy Spirit were present. For if it provides the power of speaking before earthly princes, ought it not rather provide it to those who sing praises before the highest Prince? For we have it from Christ, who is the faithful witness, in the Gospel according to Matthew: "When you stand before kings and governors, do not think how or what you are to speak, because it is not you who speak, but the Holy Spirit who speaks in you." Nor can we have harmony of mind with God, from which truth may spring forth and grow together, unless He who said: "I am the truth" provides us this harmony and truth. Hence concerning the first one rebelling and dissenting from that harmony it was said: He

--- Page 1042 ---
TONE EIGHT. 450

may it designate praises and praisers. The Organ, although it is said that it sounds through pipes with bellows blowing, this is nevertheless a general name for all musical instruments, so that it may suggest multi-faceted praise. Cymbals, however, which sound by touch, represent our lips: which emit sound by a certain striking against each other. But Cassiodorus interprets those instrumentally, saying: 'Let the Trumpet resound for the King: let the Psaltery sing to God: the Cithara with the rest for the bridegroom: with the rest, I say, which sound through the tension of strings.' Let the Organ, built like a tower with various pipes, [Marginal note: Aug. Greg.] resound for our leader and conqueror. I will omit what Augustine, Gregory, and others again think here about instruments of this kind, and we will bring forth those things which the Holy Spirit suggested to us, the least of all. The Trumpet (let sacred scripture teach) invites that praise which divine singers gave to God in their assemblies and now report: to whom it is said through Isaiah: 'Exalt your voice like a trumpet.' The Psaltery signifies those fathers of the Old Testament [Marginal note: Isaiah.] who, through the observance of the Decalogue, deserved to be counted among the divine singers, yet by the power of Him from whom comes all grace and merit: because no one (says Paul) is justified by the law. The Cithara [Marginal note: Paul.] comprehends evangelical proclaim

--- Page 1043 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

the body, which it inhabited, must also have been purged: so that it too may join in the
[Marginal note: David.] praises of the artificer, as we touched upon above. Which the prophet had foretold, saying: Praise
him with strings and organ: For our body is everywhere called an organ,
[Marginal note: Dorylaos.] through whose nerves, and veins, and arteries the soul operates and is felt, just as
sound is through the pipes of an instrumental organ. For just as the world (with Dorylaos the Pythagorean
as witness) is the organ of God: so the body is the organ of the soul, whose nerves,
muscles, bones, and all arteries are now called pipes, now strings of this
corporeal organ: which strings are called מנים *minim* in Hebrew, which properly
[Marginal note: David.] interpreting we could say means *species*, or *genera*: namely, the genera of the multi-
fold inner arteries, all of which the divine psalmist elsewhere excites together with the soul to the praise of the
prince, saying: Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, or all my inner parts, to his holy name.

☛ TWELFTH MODE, EPITHALAMIA.
Who may sing epithalamia. First Concert.

[Large decorative initial E] All musical instruments having been prepared, it remains that an
epithalamium be sung, which is a sacred hymn celebrated

--- Page 1044 ---
**TONVS OCTAVVS. 451**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

--- Page 1045 ---
**CANTICLE THE THIRD**

[Left Column]

with lenses, prudence, and preserved by
myrrh from evil conversations corrupting
good morals.
h Golden hands, from the preciousness of good works,
turned and round, so that in works it may imitate the
spherical artisan, and full of hyacinths, that is,
heavenly affections.
i The belly and intestines, polished like ivory, are
pure thoughts, but intersected with sapphires of
heavenly influences, without which we are not
sufficient to think anything.
k The feet of affections are also polished like cut
marble, and like columns fixed upon golden bases
of charity, which is the root and foundation of all
virtues.
l Her appearance and the beauty of her whole body
are likened to Lebanon, that is, a forest planted
with trees; because sometimes it is taken for the
paradise of delights, which God had planted with
all kinds of trees, that is, delights and degrees given
to rational creatures to be sought by us, except for
the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
m Therefore, the bridegroom is to be sought in this
garden, where he delights in the scent of roses,
that is, the fragrance of our good works, and also
their fruits, tasted with the good pleasure of the
Father; because his food is to do the will of the Father.

[Right Column]

l But the face and beauty of the
whole body, such as Lebanon, which, girded
with perennial foliage, casts its gleaming
summit into the air.
m Therefore, seek him, I beg you, O maidens,
for through the green gardens (as I think)
he gathers this flower of the rose and reaps
fragrant herbs.

[Decorative flourish]

**Epithalamium for the bride,**

a You shine beautifully, and your face, my friend, is as joyful
as the palaces of Jerusalem.
b And you are formidable in contrast, when your brow gathers its clouds,
like a martial host arrayed.
c Look down a little, I pray, and turn away your eyes for a moment,
by which I swell with pride.
d Your hair, arranged in order around your temples,
like flocks of goats.
e As a snowy flock of sheep when it comes forth from the river,
so do your teeth gleam.
f And your cheeks shine with red and white color,
like a split pomegranate.
g And your white navel is the image of a crater
made by an artisan's hand.
h And your belly is like wheat, among whose sprouts
a spike of roses gleams yellow.
i And soft breasts cling to your slender bosom,
like fawns resting.
k Sixty queens and eighty concubines
speak such things of you.

[Bottom Section]

a The bride is called beautiful like the heavenly Jerusalem, to which she tends, having a symbol with it; whence Jerusalem figures both that heavenly city and the particular bride or collection of all brides, who descends from heaven as a bride adorned for her husband, nor had anything more fitting to compare a friend to.
b Who, though so beautiful, yet because of her modesty and the fortification of virtues and charisms, is terrible to the enemy, like an army's battle line. c He prays her to turn away her eyes in a flattering manner, when he is too proud, so that the bridegroom may grow in the sight of such a bride.
d The hairs are like flocks of goats, but not those kids which were given for the lot of Azazel, or who will be placed on the left for judgment, but of those who are placed from Gilead, that is, who are placed before the Lord as a heap of testimony; for a good kid and numbered hairs are the same, and can be considered by the same Hebrew word.
e Ivory teeth are innocent and pure, like sheep ascending from the washing.
f The cheeks are painted and arranged like a piece of pomegranate.

--- Page 1046 ---
**EIGHTH TONE.**              **452**

**l** Who is this woman who has brought herself here like the serene light      **g** Your navel is not
  Of the rising Dawn?                     yet severed from
  Beautiful, she sends forth rays from her full horns            your mother's womb: like a
  As the moon with pure light.                    turned crater, most
**m** Now I think a garden holds you, where the nut tree spreading its branches       capacious for receiving
  Casts a

--- Page 1047 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**

[Left column marginal notes]
n Therefore, finding the bride in a fall, he calls her back from it, saying: "Return, return, O Shulamite," that is, pacified, and perfected by my merits, and constituted victor over enemies. Whence she is to be applauded, according to what follows: "What do you see in the Shulamite, but choirs of camps no longer warring, but dancing for joy?"

o Therefore, raised up and fitted with proper morals and affections, all looking on and recognizing her blessed state, she induces such great admiration that they say: "How beautiful are the steps of your affections and works in sandals, by which, namely, your feet are defended, lest they be offended by an evil stone, O daughter of the prince?" For she is called bride and daughter.

[Main text]
Thus, intertwined in mutual bonds,
h *Among the beautiful coverings of the bed we shall lie:*
*Which, sprinkled with various perfumes, is fragrant,*
i *And around, sixty men keep watch:*
*Who surpass all Israel in strength.*
k *Soon, gently, sleep will come to our eyes*
*Peacefully diffused through all our limbs:*
l *Nor, I pray, let anyone awaken us before.*
*By creaking footsteps, or obstructing murmur:*
*Than quiet itself spontaneously takes itself from our eyes.*

a ¶ The affections of true heavenly marriage are expressed in every possible way by mystical words. First, reciprocal love is declared when one is shown to be solicitous for the other, while they mutually embrace each other in love, and between breasts – not indeed feminine ones, but those better ones from which milk is offered, which he who drinks knows how to reject evil and choose good.
b Nourished by this milk, both burn with a common love: For the breasts in the archetype are fountains flowing prophetic streams. They are also the legal books offering us the true milk of wisdom.
c To suckle at these breasts one comes through a kiss, in which the soul, dying to the world, lives for God alone, content with that milk, which is far better than all wine of the wisdom of lower things. But sometimes we also suck wine from the same breasts: concerning which it is also said, "your breasts will be like clusters of grapes."
d Therefore, the kiss given and the milk drunk, one is introduced to the mother's chamber, not indeed of this lower and mortal one, but rather of that better one who is called the mother of children, rejoicing and gladdening, namely, in a most fruitful offspring from whom we must be reborn if we wish to enter the kingdom of heaven, concerning whom the Apostle says, "That Jerusalem which is above is free, which is our mother:" Into whose chamber are introduced those who have received the true kiss and have partaken of that good milk.
e Thither also, the introduced soul drinks pure wine and the nectar of love seasoned with the juice of pomegranates, that is, of true charity, so that it may be preserved from the intoxication of wanton and perverse love.
f Therefore, burning with that love, the spouses come to mutual and holy embraces, through the arms of virtues and good things, which are accustomed to be common among true friends.
g In this embrace, the left hand, and all that pertains to it, are subjected to the head and reason: just as it was once commanded: "Your desire shall be subject to you," which is according to blood, and wise in its nature: which also in the archetype receives influence from the left, But the right hand rejoices in the embrace of love and all propitious and anointing influences. These two, namely fear and love, are accustomed to thrive in lovers, so that the latter (love) may grow warm and advance, while the former (fear) may take care not to offend, and thereby provoke the beloved to anger: But fear ought to be subordinate to love.
h Embraced, connected, and joined by this love, each, having now attained the end, ought to lie down and rest upon those beautiful and fragrant coverings and beds of true heavenly marriage: Whereupon the bride, ascending, sings, "In peace, I will both lie down and sleep."
i Therefore, so that one may rest securely, those chambers and beds are surrounded by sixty strong men, not just any, but from the strongest of Israel, that is, those fighting for God in that militia of the heavenly army: Who are chosen in the number sixty, derived from the first perfect number six and the complete number ten, to signify the complete perfection of the guardians: All of whom hold swords, indeed from those of whom it is said, "My sword is drunk in heaven:" And they are taught for wars, and that warfare by which Michael fought against the dragon. Therefore, each of the warriors

--- Page 1048 ---
**TONE EIGHTH.**

having a sword on his thigh, as is customary, מִפַּחַד בַּלֵּילוֹת mi pacad belelot, that is, from the fear or terror of the night, so that they may indeed defend from the powers who are accustomed to terrify us in both the night of time and of sin. Therefore, from these, those guards defend those resting in those tabernacles of trust and security, so that they may not be troubled by any terror.
**k** In which security the soul rests so placidly, in Him from whom it received a kiss, that in that slumber it may be transformed into that very thing in which it rests, and become one and the same spirit with Him.
**l** Therefore, when in that sleep the soul is lifted up and ascends to God, all companions are adjured not to excite or awaken one thus resting, until the spirit, which has seized it, has prolonged that sleep. This is especially so since it inspires when it wills, and is not in the power of the recipient, but of the very one inspiring and coming; therefore, it must be left undisturbed until it has departed. And because in these very embraces and sleep the bride becomes beautiful

--- Page 1049 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD
[ornament] MODULE THIRTEENTH: TRIUMPH. [ornament]
What is a just fight. First Harmony.

[Decorative Initial N, depicting a figure in a landscape]A noble and glorious triumph first requires a just fight,
and a beautiful victory: And then a fight is just, when there is a le-
gitimate reason for fighting, with war also having been declared beforehand: Likewise, with the
authority of the Prince intervening, whose role it is to declare war, and that it be fought justly,
not however for the sake of evil vengeance. If however our Emperor Christ
had a just cause in the war which He undertook against the enemy of the human race, it is manifest:
since that most monstrous robber, the ancient serpent, who is the devil,
held the human race itself under the harshest and most horrible yoke of servitude:
Which indeed he had subjected by deceit and manifold fraud. Against
this one, therefore, Christ, fighting with truth and piety, and also with zeal for divine
honor and the salvation of souls, was most just in war. And lest the enemy (though unjust)
could have any just complaint, war was declared against him by the ancient
fathers and prophets, to whom this had been entrusted as if they were heralds. Among whom
[Marginal note: David.] the most solemn royal prophet of God, a herald, proclaimed, saying: He delivered the
poor from the mighty, and the poor who had no helper. Indeed, the Prince Himself
[Marginal note: CHRIST] publicly declared, saying: Now the prince of this world will be cast out, because I am
about to contend with him: and what is more, the enemy himself attacked Him while He was fast-
ing in the desert. Indeed, He had the authority to wage war from the Father, who Him to
[Marginal note: Isaiah.] this war destined, commanding that He should conquer the enemy by His wounds, just as
He had said through Isaiah: 'For the sins of my people I struck him,' that is, 'I handed him over to be struck
and wounded': For in this new kind of battle, victory was to be achieved
by wounds: In this war, indeed, no fraud or deceit intervened, nor
any evil desire for vengeance: but rather, the piety of liberating those unjustly oppressed. He fought therefore
with truth against the lying enemy: He fought with zeal against the envious one: with goodness
against the malicious and wicked one: with meekness against the proud one. For this
battle, all soldiers of Christ, who received His pay in baptism,
ought diligently to gird themselves, just as Michael, the guardian of souls, had done against the same
enemy, as John narrates, saying: Michael and his angels fought with the dra-
gon: Which battle he had undertaken for Christ the Prince, and by the same laws
[Marginal note: John.] by which He Himself fought: For the Evangelist says that when a woman (namely, the God-
bearing virgin) clothed with the sun, that is, with divine light, having the moon,
that is, the synagogue, under her feet, and crowned with twelve stars, that is, with that divine,
heavenly, and apostolic twelve, of which we spoke above, was seen and shown in heaven to give birth to her
first and only-begotten Son, who was to rule all nations with an iron rod: and who
was to give blessedness to all. That ancient serpent and dragon, who is
the devil, puffed up with excessive rashness, did not want to receive blessedness from Christ, who was to be born of the virgin:
but swelling in mind, he said: I will ascend into heaven above

--- Page 1050 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 454

the stars of God, that is, I will exalt my throne above the saints, I will place my seat to the north, as if standing opposite him who comes from the south. And rightly he turns himself to the north, from where all evil spreads, and from where all ruin and fall (come). Against whom Michael and his angels rose up for Christ, receiving [Marginal note: Dauid] that decree sung by the divine fellow-singer: "And let all his angels adore him." All of whom undertook war against the dragon for Christ and the laws of Christ. For the serpent fought with stubbornness, these with obedience; that one with hatred, these with love; that one with envy, these with zeal; that one with pride, these with piety; that one presuming on his own strength, these supported by divine power. By this justice and this favor Michael and his army prevailed against the dragon and his followers, even to their complete extermination and irrevocable expulsion from that kingdom in which Christ, the peaceful king, reigns in peace. Therefore the dragon, vanquished and cast out, directed a threefold battle line against us, which are the monstrous things of the world, of which the dragon had become the prince and tyrant. Which battle lines John mentions in his epistle, and are now known [Marginal note: Ioannes] to all, namely, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. And this is what the same John continues in the Apocalypse: "And the dra [Marginal note: idem.] gon, enraged, went to make war with the rest, who keep the commandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus Christ." And a little later: "And it was given to him to make war with the saints and to conquer," unless Christ had prepared victory for us, by whose favor he is often conquered by us.

Concerning the great victory obtained by Christ for himself and for his soldiers. Second Harmony.

[Illuminated initial I] N this war our emperor Christ was so victorious that the enemy could not inflict even the slightest harm or wound upon him; hence he joyfully declares: "For the prince of this world comes, and he [Marginal note: CHRI STVS. Isaias.] has nothing in me." The entire praise for this victory must be ascribed to him, who alone fought with the enemy, just as it had been said in the prophecy of Isaiah: "I have trodden the winepress alone, and of the peoples there was no man with me." And for this reason, when Peter, with drawn sword, wanted to rush out against the enemies, he said: "Put your sword into its sheath. Do you not think that I could ask my Father, and he would send me more than twelve legions of angels? But I do not want to, because I alone must enter this battle." Hence, not without the admiration of those listening, and those attentively trusting, in the conflict itself he cried out to the Father: "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?" — alone, that is, in a duel with the fiercest enemy. Which, Paul, conscious of the secrets of God, understanding, explained the mystery to the Colossians, [Marginal note: Paulus.] saying: "When you were dead and plundered by sin, Christ made you alive together, forgiving all transgressions, blotting out the handwriting of the decree that was against us, contrary to us; and he took it out of the way, nailing it to the cross. Stripping principalities and powers, he led them out confidently, triumphing openly—

--- Page 1051 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

...triumphing over them openly in himself. Did not Paul here expound and explain the mystery and order of the entire war and Christ's victory over the adversary of the human race? For he showed why he fought, namely, to deliver us from death, that is, from the angel of death, and from sin, remitting the debts for which we were liable and slaves, erasing the bond which we had made to the devil by our evil-working hands: And that through the cross he paid the debt, enriching us with the spoils of the principalities and powers of darkness: And finally he concludes that he achieved this victory and triumph through himself, whence he was deservedly most glorious. But as far as we are concerned, he fought alone, so that we might owe (our redemption) to him alone who redeemed us, as Ambrose [Marginal note: Ambro.] discusses at length in the book 'On the Patriarchs'. And he did not achieve this victory [Marginal note: Paulus.] only for himself, but for all of us, thereby showing his magnificence: Which the apostle openly states, saying: "But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord," provided that we are willing to faithfully fight against the same prince of the world and of darkness: and against his evil persuasions and battle lines: as many have done, considering all earthly things as dung, so that they might rush into the battle line of Dis, taming the flesh and pleasures, so that they might avoid the allurements of Azazel, subject to the laws of obedience, and enslaved to humble things, lest the pride or arrogance of Asmodeus find a place to inflict some wound. Which threefold battle, namely, in the spirit, in the sensitive man, and in the delight of external things surrounding us, has been declared, so that, with the three-headed beast defeated in this threefold combat, we might attain that exalted ternary, or in some way merit it. Indeed, we are rightly united with the Holy Spirit when, having laid aside the pride of our own spirit, nothing at all remains in us that would hinder complete subjection and adherence, by which we are able not only to obey, but to be united with that Spirit. Appropriately also does one attain to the Son, Christ, who crucified his own flesh with its vices and carnal desires. Finally, we best come to the most pious Father when, having piously cast aside or expended all things, or at least having destroyed them with all our might, we pursue Him with religion, piety, and the most vehement ardor of soul: then He Himself, who sees in secret, will reward us. He also cherishes us, embraces us, and nourishes us, according to what the Son testifies, saying: "For your heavenly Father knows what you need." For this exalted ternary is against the lowest and most terrible (ternary), indeed, by that divine ordinance, by which all evil things opposing good have been so established, that with those rejected, we may come to these (good things) with no small glory.

The glory of the triumph of the emperor and the soldiers. Concert Third.

**P**arted, therefore, with victory achieved, a triumph was deservedly due to the victor, since he liberated captives, and not only subjugated one city, or a narrow dominion, or a weak kingdom, but the entire human race, both that which existed in all past times, and that which will be in the future: indeed, he subjected the entire world to his own dominion, as Paul says

--- Page 1052 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS.
455

with the Ephesians: The Father established him at his right hand in the heavens above every
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that [Marginal note: CHRIST.]
is named, not only in this age, but also in the future: and subjected all things under
his feet. Into which glory he entered by fighting, especially in his passion, as he
himself testified in the gospel, which is titled according to Luke, saying: It was necessary
for Christ to suffer, and thus to enter into his glory. Therefore, he began to triumph on the day,
when, redeeming captives, he gloriously rose: but he completed the triumph when with solemn
pomp he ascended to the kingdom, as the Church sings: A triumph of grace is given,
ascending the throne of the right hand. For he ascended in the chariot of his glorified body,
drawn by four white horses, that is, by the four endowments of the glorious body:
because the heavy put on lightness, so that he might ascend more easily and delightfully: and the gross
became subtle, so that he might penetrate heaven without obstacle. The corruptible, however,
became incorruptible, so that he might persevere in eternal glory. But the obscure
was turned into light, as on the day of transfiguration his face shone
like the sun: For it ought to be filled with light, if it wishes to stand before the Father of lights, from
whom there is no shadow. And finally, from the animal he rose, and ascended
spiritual, opening the way, and providing the manner, whence all with the same endowments may
rise: and may come to the blessed kingdom. Also, in that triumph were carried
insignia and arms, with which he had vanquished the enemy, namely, the cross, nails, and the
spear, whence the Church sings: The banners of the King advance, the mystery of the cross shines. The
ministers and attendants of the emperor exclaimed, singing: The Lord has reigned
from the wood, and likewise in all the instruments, by which he was tortured, and which pertain to the
cross. And the vanquished captives were present, bound for the pomp of the triumph,
as our John relates, saying: I saw an angel having the key of the abyss, and [Marginal note: John.]
a great chain in his hand: and he seized the dragon, that ancient serpent,
who is the devil, and bound him, so that he might no longer deceive the nations, as indeed
he had done before Christ, by a certain force leading men to his worship: although he will be loosed
for a short time when a thousand years are completed, that is, for a space determined by the Father:
and then in the antichrist power will be granted to do those things, which before Christ
no one did, although all things will be deceptive. But let us return to our subject.
Therefore, the enemy was bound with all his vanquished satellites: But the captives,
whom from the hands of the enemy, and from the Tartarean places, with gates and bars broken, he
had rescued, stood rejoicing, triumphing together with the prince, and many of them
had ascended in chariots of already glorified bodies, as the evangelist says.
Many bodies of saints rose with him, and entered into the holy [Marginal note: Matthew.]
city, namely the infernal Jerusalem, and finally the super-celestial: and appeared
to many in both Jerusalems. Moreover, very many singers exclaimed,
exulting with great applause. And others, marveling at this ascension with such a triumph, [Marginal note: Luke: Acts.]
said (as Luke narrates): Men of Galilee, why do you stand gazing up into heaven, where
your gaze does not reach? This Jesus, who was taken up from you into heaven,

--- Page 1053 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

thus he will come, just as you saw him going into heaven. Then will be given
to you a full abundance of rejoicing, and triumphing with him. But what harmonies, what
sounds of trumpets, and other instruments there were in that triumph, the divine
[Marginal note: David.] Harpist, full of the Holy Spirit, in some way prophesies, saying: All nations, clap
your hands, because he redeemed all, and triumphed for all, not however
for the Jewish people, nor for a figurative Israel only. Shout to God with
the voice of exultation, as was done in the time of Jubilee, which was the greatest of solemnities.
Nor did the prophet have, what more excellent thing to propose to be done in this triumph:
For Adonai, that is, the Lord JESUS, to whom we have declared that name to be fitting,
has become high and exalted, terrible, a tremendous king, and to be
venerated over all the earth, who before had stood before the judges of the earth meek as a lamb.
He subjected peoples to us, namely, to divine worshippers and leaders of the Christian army:
and nations, or a multitude, under our feet: which Moses and the legal priests
could not do, who only ruled the Israelite family, and a few foreigners.
He chose for us, that is, he allotted, and divided his inheritance to us, or chose us for an inheritance for himself:
or led us into his inheritance, that is, into the kingdom prepared from the foundation of the world: And this for
the glory or magnificence of Jacob, whom he loved: because all of us are now made Israelites,
chosen for eternal life. And God-man ascended in jubilation, with a sound indeed most worthy of all,
and the Lord with the voice of a trumpet, or horn, which was sounded in the time of Jubilee,
and in Hebrew is called שופר *shofar*. Sing therefore, and say a hymn to JESUS our God,
sing to our king, Christ, sing: For he has now become king of all the earth,
and King of kings, and Lord of lords: because he redeemed all things.
Therefore sing wisely, or intelligently, to such a great king, paying attention, namely,
to those things which you say, so that you may speak praises not only with your lips, but with your heart and
[Marginal note: Isaiah.] mind. Now Christ God will reign over the nations and God-man will sit upon the throne of his sanctuary.
Which sanctuary in its archetype is called תפארת *Tipheret*, that is, glory, beauty, or triumph.
Hence in a typical mystery it was said in Isaiah: As you once led your people out of Egypt by the hand
of Moses, to make for yourself a name *Tipheret*, which we have interpreted as the name
of glory, and can be interpreted as the name of triumph: Which name indeed he acquired for himself
in the true leading out of the whole human race from Egypt, that is, from
[Marginal note: Zechariah. Isaiah.] the anguish of diabolical servitude, and the Tartarean prison through his blood, as
Zechariah prophesied, saying: You also, by the blood of your covenant, have brought forth
your prisoners from the pit. Hence when Isaiah began to prophesy about this acquired triumph,
he prefaced it with those things which the angels said, marveling at the triumphant ascent
of Christ, a new triumph of grace acquired through blood and death (as
[Marginal note: Dionysius.] Dionysius explains) indeed they cried out: Why is your garment red,
like those who tread in the winepress? To whom the triumphant one responded, saying:
I have trodden the winepress alone, and of the peoples there was no man with me: I trod them (against whom I fought –

--- Page 1054 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 456

(namely, I have struggled/fought) in my fury, and I trampled them in my wrath. And their blood was sprinkled upon my garments, because, namely, I received the blood of sinners and their debt upon myself, pouring out my blood for their liberation, so that all might triumph more securely and widely.

On the triumph of various leaders after Christ's departure. Con. IIII.

[Decorative initial Q] Although victory over the entire world was achieved by Christ in his blood, to whom praise and glory are owed by all: nevertheless, by his command and favor, others triumphed (especially the twelve apostolic princes) over the twelve parts of the world, through the virtue of the Holy Spirit, with which he had filled them. Therefore, they are called prefects over the twelve tribes, in which (as we have said) the entire human race is encompassed. Nor was Paul excluded, who labored more than all: For he too (as is clear) triumphed with them over many cities and provinces, which he brought under the dominion of Christ: For example, over Antioch, Seleucia, Rhodes, Perga, Pamphylia, and Cilicia: Likewise over Phrygia, Philippi, the Macedonians, and Corinthians, the Thessalonians, Athenians, and Ephesians, and over many islands of Greece. Also over Italy and Spain, to which regions (as we have said) he carried the name of the Lord JESUS; to Paul himself, especially, the triumph is to be awarded. To Peter, however, over Rome, which began to serve under Christ's empire by his admonitions: To John over Asia: To Thomas over India: and to the rest over the provinces assigned to them by lot for preaching. Having achieved this victory, they deservedly ought to obtain triumph, and crowns with the emperor, and to be placed as his assessors upon twelve thrones, so that they might preside and judge the true twelve tribes of Israel, concerning which enough has been said above. Hence the prophet sings of them: The princes of the peoples are gathered with the God of Abraham, [Marginal note: David.] who saw the days of our emperor, and rejoiced. And he is called the God of Abraham, because his coming was first promised to Abraham. Also, the God of Abraham, because, having indeed become a new man, as that changed name indicates to those who understand the mystery, he was constituted Father of a new family to be regenerated by the redeemer. The twelve princes also are so united with Christ our God, that the prophet adds concerning them: The Divine ones of the earth, or the Divine ones who are shields, or protectors of the earth, have been greatly exalted: because they have been exalted above all tribes of the earth, and placed [Marginal note: The same.] upon the chief seats of glory. And concerning these, the divine Psalmist sings in another psalm, saying: Two-edged swords in their hands, to execute vengeance upon the vanquished enemies, who had prevailed against the human race, and against all nations. This vengeance they have executed, and do execute together with Him, of whom John says: [Marginal note: John.] That a two-edged sword proceeded from His mouth, therefore, armed together, they will execute the judgment written and determined in the divine mind, binding hostile kings in fetters, and their nobles in iron manacles. This triumph, therefore, was given especially to the apostolic princes, and consequently

--- Page 1055 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

to all preachers who have led peoples into the dominion of Christ and God,
and to all those who have well governed the flock entrusted to them, or at least themselves:
whence it follows: "This glory is to all His saints." And in the Apocalypse, the Emperor says:
"To him who overcomes, I will grant to sit with Me on My throne," which is the true chariot
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
of triumph, "just as I overcame and sat down with My Father on His throne."

☞ FOURTEENTH MODULE: THE REWARD.
How great and precious is the reward of those who fight.
First Harmony.

[Large decorative initial S]
[Marginal note: Paul.]
Under many metaphors, the reward has been promised to those who contend lawfully.
For first, God promised it under the type of a land flowing with milk and honey:
But Paul sometimes calls it a crown, saying: "No one is crowned unless he has competed lawfully:"
And again: "They indeed, that they may receive a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible." Sometimes He calls it a prize,
[Marginal note: CHRIST. GOD.]
saying: "All indeed run, but one receives the prize: So run, that you may obtain it."
But Christ sometimes calls that reward a daily denarius:
sometimes nuptials, sometimes the tree of life, sometimes hidden manna.
But to His most familiar friend Abraham, God explained it more clearly, saying: "I am
your exceedingly great reward:" Than which nothing greater, more precious, or equal could be given
or conceived: because it is the highest good, in which are all good things. Which
[Marginal note: CHRIST.]
nevertheless is the same, although named in different ways: for God the Father Himself is named
"crown" by Hebrew theologians: For He is indeed our crown and reward,
since He is the principal object of blessedness, as the Son says: "This
is eternal life, that they may know You, God the Father." And because the Son is the same as the Father,
it follows: "And Him whom You sent, His Son:" Who indeed is the true land of the living
promised to us, from which flowed and flows the milk of divine wisdom and honey, that is,
the sweetness and taste of divine things, which is concerning the true manna: which is nothing else
to say than a certain admirable food. For the children of Israel, seeing that food
of angels, or of the strong, sent from heaven, having every flavor in itself,
said to one another, wondering: מן הוא *man hu*, which interpreting
we say, "What is this?" Hence that food was called *man hu*, but we in Latin say *manna*:
for that is rather the exclamation of one wondering, than the name of the food. For since that food
sufficiently transcends the grasp of the weak, it is therefore called the food of the strong, although
our translation has "of angels." And because no one can understand it
or taste it unless he has experienced it, Christ says in the Apocalypse: "No one knows it, except he who
receives it." This reward is also called a daily denarius: a denarius, that is,
a true and complete reward, just as a denarius is a complete number: "Daily,"
however, from the illumination of the object, and the clear intuition of the blessed. It is also called
a prize, promised namely to those who run, as a reward. This reward is therefore...

--- Page 1056 ---
EIGHTH TONE. 457

reward (by whatever name it may be called) a good never failing, nor diminished by
sharing. Nor, because it is communicated more to one than to another, does it leave
room for envy to the one having less, since all rejoice together in the glory and good
of the co-heirs. For those who were found envious were irrevocably expelled from that
fellowship and communion of that reward.
      That that reward is pleasant and eternal. Consideration II.
[Decorative initial D containing a small landscape scene] Concerning this reward, how pleasant it is, he who had approved it
explains, saying: "Taste and see how sweet the Lord is." But hoping for greater
things, he says again: "You have made known to me the paths of life," namely in the [Marginal note: David.]
resurrection, as Ambrose says. "You will fill me with joy, or pleasantness, with your [Marginal note: Ambrose. Peter.]
countenance," as Peter alleges in the Acts of the Apostles. What delights will be at the
right hand of God, where there is piety, mercy, grace, and everything pleasant and
delightful. Which delight will be unto the end, that is, eternal and unfailing: And this
results from multiple causes, because, namely, the object is beautiful to the sight,
delightful to the sense, sweet to the taste, and perfectly proportioned to all faculties,
with the added covenant of perpetual possession. For God is that beauty, from whom
all beautiful things are made: as the Platonists rightly perceive, along with Dionysius [Marginal note: Platonists. Dionysius. Hierotheus.]
and Hierotheus, who say: Just as each thing is called good because it participates in
the highest good, and being because it participates in the highest being: so it is beautiful
by participation in the first beautiful, which is now called יפית *iaphit*, now הדר *hadar*,
now תפארת *tipheret*: Although they differ, if we carefully consider the force of the
words. For *iaphit* signifies true beauty coming from within. *Hadar*, however,
indicates grace and beauty in appearance, attire, adornment, and manners. But
*tipheret* signifies beauty itself, and intrinsic majesty resulting with a certain glory and
apparent triumph. For *iaphit* is called in the forty-fourth psalm, where we have [Marginal note: Psalm.]
translated: "You are fairer than the sons of men:" For in Hebrew it is יפיפית מבני אדם
*iaph iaphita mibeni Adam*. Which, translating word for word, we would say: "Beautiful
with beauty from, or above the sons of Adam." We have *hadar* in the ninety-fifth
psalm, where it is said: "Confession and beauty are before him," when in Hebrew it is
הוד והדר לפניו *hod ue hadar lepanau*: We also have *tipheret* there, ותפארת במקדשו
*hoz ue tipheret bemicadso*, that is, "strength and beauty in his sanctuary:" For which
we have, "holiness and magnificence in his sanctification:" We have these three words
in many other places. But it should be noted that that majesty and beauty, which is
called *tipheret*, is sometimes indicated by light: Whence he who dwells in it says: "I
am the light of the world." Sometimes by the sun, according to that of the psalmist:
"He has set his tabernacle in the sun." For Abraham had pitched his tent towards the [Marginal note: Genesis.]
south, in which he had greatly prospered. Isaac also, but he was not too enriched there:
Which is hinted at in what is said:

--- Page 1057 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

Isaac sowed in that land, and found in that very year a hundredfold, but the Hebrew truth has it: He found in that year a hundred measures of barley, and the Lord blessed him, and the man became great: and he went on progressing and growing until he became very great. (Hierony.) Jerome wonders how he could have become so great through a hundred measures of barley found. The truth is, that he prospered in that northern influence indicated by [Hebrew: שעורים] seharim, which signifies both barley and many other things. But Jacob pitched his tent in the middle, where Tipheret is, that is, beauty, and the supramundane sun. Concerning which tent, or tents, it is said in the book of Numbers: How beautiful are the tents of Jacob, and the tents of (Num.) Israel. Therefore, it is the same to say, beautiful in form above the sons of men: He was the true light illuminating all: He placed his tabernacle in the sun: He will reign in the house of Jacob forever: And many similar things, which agree, as is known to those who understand what is conveyed by such things. Therefore, God is beautiful, our reward and object, and consequently delightful to the inner sense through divinity: and to the outer (sense) through assumed humanity: (CHRIST. Peter. David.) as Christ himself, our redeemer, reward, and rest, says: He will enter, namely, to divinity, and will go out to humanity, and in both places he will find pastures. He is also sweet and pleasant to the taste, as Peter says: If indeed you have tasted that the Lord is gracious. And David in the psalm: The Lord is good to all. Finally, it is proportioned to all powers, although it is infinite, exceeding all powers: because by that excess it by no means corrupts, but grants as much as the capacity of the recipient power allows: And this is true joy, which results from proportion and suitability. Which joy, which delight, which sweetness, which finally full happiness would be nothing, in a way, unless it were continuous with the security of the possessor. Therefore, our supreme (CHRIST.) emperor, in order to make us certain about this joy never to be lost, said to his disciples, and consequently to all: Your heart will rejoice, and no one will take your joy from you.

**FIFTEENTH MODULE, DOMINION.**
Concerning the ample dominion of the prince. First Harmony.

[Large decorative initial P] After the triumph, dominion was given to this triumphant one, since he is King of kings and Lord of lords. What kind of dominion this is, (Paul) Paul explains in very few words, saying: Whom he appointed heir of all things. Nor can it be extended further, since all (Isaiah) things are subject to him. Concerning whom Isaiah also, when speaking of his birth, prophesied, saying: His dominion will be multiplied, and of his peace there will be no end: for he will be the prince of peace. Nor should anyone be disturbed if multiple wars still exist in the lower kingdom, which is called the Church Militant: because not all his enemies have yet been placed under the footstool of his feet, (Paul) according to that of Paul: He sits at the right hand of God, from now on waiting until his enemies are made his footstool.

--- Page 1058 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 458**

...stool for his feet. But when the time is given for hostile death to be destroyed, then it will rejoice in perfect peace in all its members. The prophet continues: "He will sit upon the throne of David, and over his kingdom." Indeed, he is rightly said to sit on the throne of [Marginal note: Dauid.] David, who was the first king, and the only one pleasing to God among those who reigned in all Israel. And he was from the tribe of Judah, which was adorned with a royal lineage. [Marginal note: Moses.] For each of the tribes of Israel had its own peculiar privileges, as Father Jacob, [Marginal note: Iahac.] and after him Moses, [Marginal note: Moses.] hint at in their blessings with a hidden and profound mystery. Therefore, it refers to the royal scepter having been designated for the tribe of Judah, saying: "The scepter shall not depart from Judah." And for this reason, Jacob did not trust any son guaranteeing for Benjamin to be brought down to Egypt, except Judah, as a king, whose word ought to be truthful. And although the kingdom did not always appear in the tribe of Judah, it was nevertheless always adorned with the royal scepter in its archetype. For David [Marginal note: Dauid] had been chosen as king over all Israel, and anointed by Samuel, yet before he actually obtained the kingdom, which was already decreed in the divine mind, he served under Saul for many years. And because of his merits and glorious deeds, he was indeed most famous among the people, but hated by Saul, and watched with many snares; so much so that he thought it necessary to yield to envy, preferring to serve foreigners rather than an envious king. And after he began to reign, he reigned for seven years, confined to his own tribe of Judah alone. This was shown to us as an example, so that no one should be saddened if they do not immediately obtain the promised kingdom. However, this royal scepter endured in the tribe of Judah, either under the name of king or leader, until Christ. When he arrived, it was by no means taken away (although the oracle says: [Marginal note: Genesis.] "Until the Messiah comes"), but under him, it was changed for the better, since he is King of kings, and for all of us, he acquired that true and eternal kingdom. Therefore, when Pilate asked if he was a King, he replied: "You say that I am a king." [Marginal note: CHRI] But my kingdom is not of this world, but having a super-mundane root in the [Marginal note: STVS.] archetype, from which descending I brought with me the kingdom, which is mysteriously hinted at in this name יהודה Iehuda, from whose truly royal lineage I am. In this name are contained all the letters of the great four-letter name, or Tetragrammaton, with the letter ד dalet inserted, which signifies four in number. From this is hinted that the divinity and royal majesty, which is contained in the Tetragrammaton, was found in human form, a squaring from the four elements of which it is composed. Therefore, since that sacred four-letter name belongs to the Messiah, and he was true man, we easily understand that he is also the true super-mundane king, and from the true tribe of Judah; although for the time of his pilgrimage, he lay hidden in a four-square human body. But now he reigns with royal splendor on the heavenly throne, with which he will appear to mortals also in his second coming. Of whom he himself says: [Marginal note: Idem.] "When the Son of Man comes in the seat of his majesty with his angels." And again: "All will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with great power and majesty."

MMM ij

--- Page 1059 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**
How just is the rule of this prince. Con. II.

[Large initial S] But since one receives imperial or royal dignity by a twofold right, namely by inheritance and by just war: I think it must be seen how Christ our emperor claims that empire for himself not tyrannically, but by both rights: For he had in it an hereditary right, since he was the son of the supreme prince, with whom he had also created all things which he subjected to him, as Paul, the revealer of mysteries, said: "Whom he appointed heir of all things, through whom also he made the ages."
[Paulus. in margin]

But this would have been little just for him, unless by military virtue and skill (in a just war, however) he had again acquired a distinguished empire. For the kingdom is proposed as a reward for those running or contending, who have overcome the enemy in the struggle of this mortal life. Indeed, the course of life itself is like a gymnastic race, by which each person can arrive at reward or punishment. But for the contest, war has been declared against vices and Tartarean enemies, as explained above...

--- Page 1060 ---
TONVS OCTAVVS. 459

...it is that he might pay the debt for us, but strenuously fighting, he snatched the whole human race from the hands of the enemy. But since one redeemed from captivity (as laws decree) is bound to the redeemer, therefore, Zacharias, inspired by the divine spirit, sang: *That, being delivered from the hand of our enemies, we might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all our days.* [Marginal note: Zacha.] And thus that divine wisdom, which as the author of all things rightly rules in all things, as we read in Ecclesiasticus: *In every people and in every nation I held the primacy*, [Marginal note: Ecclesia.] so also in the assumed humanity, struggling, warring, conquering, and triumphing, might also justly rule by the right of a just war.

De regno commilitonum. Con. III.

[Large decorative initial N]or let it be believed that this is because we are called servants, condemned to vile servitude, since we serve him for whom to serve is to reign. Hence the Emperor declares us destined for the kingdom, to which he also invites, saying: *Come, you blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.* [Marginal note: CHRI STVS.] For if the emperor of this world presides over many kings, much better does the heavenly emperor have fellow-soldiers who are kings, to whom Peter speaks, saying: *But you are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for acquisition.* [Marginal note: Petrus.] Indeed, that conjunction of kingdom and priesthood is greatly to be pondered, because it is called a royal priesthood, to imply that every Christian ought to shine with both, namely, kingdom and priesthood, so that he may be a true soldier of him who was a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedech, who is interpreted as a righteous king. Therefore, it testifies that he was a royal priest, just as each of us ought to be. For as a true king ought to rule over all earthly things and his own body, reducing it (as often as necessary) to servitude. But as a true priest, everyone ought to offer his own body as a sacrifice to the living God, as Paul teaches, saying: *I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercy of God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God:* [Marginal note: Paulus.] To which if we add a third, namely wisdom, there will be a perfect man, as it is said, not by trivial doctrine, of Mercury, [Marginal note: Mercu,] who was thrice greatest, in wisdom, priesthood, and kingdom. But much more elegantly did our high priest Christ shine in wisdom, kingdom, and priesthood: which indeed every Christian ought to have, but especially he who holds the place of that supreme wisdom. Hence not without reason is his triple tiara or miter (which is commonly called a kingdom) distinguished, as if he were crowned with a triple diadem of wisdom, kingdom, and priesthood. For unless he is wise, he cannot be good, because every ignorant person is evil, as the Peripatetics say. [Marginal note: Peripat] Nor should only the supreme pontiff excel in doctrine, but every bishop, so called from *epi*, which is "above," and *scopos*, "intending," as if he were "intending over" the people, as Augustine interprets; [Marginal note: August.] or from *scopos*, which is "speculation" (watching), as others prefer: whence it is understood that a prelate is placed on a watchtower over his flock. But neither should any other priest lack wisdom and knowledge, because through Hosea the Lord threatens: *Because you have rejected knowledge,* [Marginal note: Osee.]

--- Page 1061 ---
The provided text is in Latin, not French. I will translate it from Latin to English, maintaining formatting and continuity.

***

[Graphic of an open book. On the left page is the number 2. On the right page is the number 3, and below it a crossed-out number 4.]

Incorrect pagination — incorrect date
NF Z 43-120-12

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp

--- Page 1062 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

[Marginal note: CHRIST.] I will repel you, lest you perform the priesthood for me. Hence the emperor said to all his followers, "I will give you a mouth and wisdom," and speaking of the Holy Spirit, whom he was about to send, he said, "He will suggest all things to you." From these things we gather that he wants his fellow soldiers to be wise. He also commands them to reign in that kingdom which we said consists in true contempt of earthly things and the mortification of oneself, therefore he said: "Unless someone renounces all that he possesses, supplying all things as a true king, he cannot be my disciple." Having obtained this wisdom and acquired this kingdom, he commands them to ascend to the true priesthood, concerning which [Marginal note: The same.] he says: "Whoever wishes to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me," offering, that is, and sacrificing himself as a living sacrifice to the eternal [Marginal note: Paul.] Father: Which the apostle, explaining more clearly, says: "Those who are of Christ have crucified their flesh with its vices and desires." And this is what, about to ascend the altar of the cross to offer himself as an immaculate lamb, [Marginal note: CHRIST.] he enjoined upon us, saying: "Do this in remembrance of me," offering not only bread and wine in memory of my body and blood, but yourselves as a living sacrifice for a sweet aroma, just as I offered myself to the Father for you. Bearing this cross in our minds, so that we may be conformed to our king, they will immediately obtain true wisdom, which is hidden in CHRIST JESUS crucified: which none of the wise men of this world has attained: From which we ascend to the royal [Marginal note: Paul.] priesthood and the priestly kingdom. Into which kingdom it is necessary for us (says Paul) to enter through many tribulations. just as the emperor [Marginal note: The same. John.] had said above: "The kingdom of heaven suffers violence." This therefore is the true kingdom, to which (as the apostle says) he called us: Whose gates our emperor opened, having vanquished the devil in the horrible struggle of the cross, as John explains in his most sacred vision, saying: "Now salvation and strength and the kingdom of our God and the power of his Christ have come; for the accuser has been cast down, who accused them day and night before our God," because of the sins by which the human race was ensnared without a liberator. But he so vanquished and cast him out on the cross that access has been opened to all who wish to enter there, so that they may reign with the emperor, to whom be praise and honor forever, Amen.

[Three leaf-like ornaments] MODULE SIXTEEN, PEACE.
What peace is. First Harmony.

[Marginal note: August.] [Large decorative initial P containing a figure] eace indeed (as Augustine rightly perceives) is the tranquility of order: which order is the disposition of equal and unequal things, assigning to each its own: For when all things are rightly ordered, tranquility and peace follow: which, since it is manifold, is explained by a manifold definition. For the peace of the body is the ordered composition of its parts, which is called health. The peace of the irrational soul is an ordered and quiet appetite. The peace of soul and body is an ordered life, and a harmonious union, and a consistent operation of both.

--- Page 1063 ---
TOMVS OCTAVVS. 462

Rational peace, however, is ordered knowledge and complete agreement of choice. And this is that most blessed gathering of two or three, in which the king of peace promises to dwell, namely when our animal nature agrees with reason, and reason with will, and will with reason. From this follows true peace with God, which is the pure and manifest observance of God's law and will: and not only that the rightly tempered mind be the temple of God, but whoever is thus composed, whatever he asks for, will immediately be heard, because he in no way deviates from what God has established. To such a one, the yoke of God and Christ is also sweet and delightful. And in such a state, the hymn sung by the angels at the birth of the Prince of Peace finds its place, saying: "And on earth peace to people of good will," [Marginal note: Angel.] namely to those whose will is in harmony with reason and God. These indeed are deemed worthy to ascend to that peace of God which surpasses all understanding, and to arrive at that celestial and sublime city, in which (according to Job) [Marginal note: Iob.] God made such concord that the city was called a vision and enjoyment of peace. And because only the peaceful can reach this kingdom of peace, its prince therefore commands his ministers that wherever they arrive, they should bring and announce peace. And He, departing from them, left this peace to be kept by testamentary right, saying: "My peace I give to you, my peace I leave to you." [Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] Whoever neglects to observe this testament will in no way be able to attain the inheritance of peace, because what is dissonant (even in the slightest) ought not, and cannot, be admitted to harmonious concert and melodious sweetness. So also those who serve the smallest sin, or in some part serve pleasure, cannot attain the kingdom, since they are servants of sin, nor that peace which some wise men define as the tranquil freedom of the soul.

From whom peace is given. Harmony II.

**S**ed since no one can be free from sin without God, therefore neither can one [Marginal note: Ecclesia.] enjoy peace without God, nor make progress in it. Hence the Church prays: "Give us that peace which the world cannot give." For the dwellings of the world are threefold: supernal, infernal, and middle. The supernal dwelling is most harmoniously ordered and filled with complete peace. The lowest is where no order, no rest, no peace, but eternal horror dwells, says Job. The middle, however, is mixed from both, in which man is first placed, with a crossroads set before him, and is continually invited to the extreme dwellings. But to the infernal dwellings one runs easily, with loose reins, no bridle, no moderation, no order observed, but everything prepared by wantonness. The descent to Avernus is therefore easiest: where mortals fall without help, so separated from themselves and from an orderly God, and so discordant, that they can no longer possess any peace or tranquility. But those who strive towards the supernal dwellings and the upper breezes undertake a difficult and arduous journey, such that without God's divine power it absolutely cannot be accomplished, as attested by the infallible truth which says: "Without me you can do nothing." For just as instru-
MMM iiij

--- Page 1064 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**

CHRISTUS. An instrument needs a tuner, who adjusts the strings or pipes, and makes them harmonious, and afterwards tunes them with due sonority: so also we, as instruments (and would that we were good ones), need a tuner, who adjusts our nerves and pipes: who doubtless are soul and body: our animal nature and spirit: the superior part and the inferior: will and reason: and finally may all things harmonize with God himself. For who instills a harmonious soul into a well-ordered body except God? Who connects those two, which seem utterly dissonant, namely body and soul, with such great harmony that it utterly shuns dissolution? Who will ever be able to adapt our mind to the divine, or know how? Who strikes the divine will with a fitting plectrum, so that it may come to that sound, to which our own also may not in vain approach? Indeed, He alone accomplishes these things, of whom the apostle says: "It is God who works in us both to will and to accomplish." And again: "Indeed the same God,
Paulus. who works all things in all." From Him therefore is given peace and harmony of soul with body: From Him it is, whence the animal man is subjected to the spirit: From Him is the agreement of human minds with one another: because He it is who makes those of one mind dwell in a house: from the same is the correspondence of our mind with the divine. Thence therefore is the fitting together of instruments: thence sonorous and harmonious operation: thence tranquility, peace, sweetness, and every good.
How sweet and harmonious this peace is. Con III.

Peace is sweet and pleasant to God, as some wise men say, that in nature nothing is thought more excellent, nothing sweeter. Because true peace is tranquility of mind, simplicity of heart, a bond of love, a chain of charity, a solace for the commonwealth, a joy for homes: domestic to angels, hostile to demons, pleasing to God above all things, and the harmony of all things. And where there is concord, there is harmony, there is sweetness, there is joy. Hence sings the prophet: "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell in unity."
Dauid. Brothers, namely soul and body, when they are in agreement: or men together, or a man and his guardian angel: because then God and Christ (whose name in the canticles is called ointment, or poured out oil) is diffused into those who thus come together, sprinkling all things with the sweetest odor and fragrance: whence it follows: "As the ointment upon the head," namely Christ, "which descends upon the beard," namely of Aaron the great priest: because through the hands of priests divine charisms are administered to the people. Therefore this ointment descends even to the hem of the garment, namely that which Christ our anointed one bought and wove for us: so that it might cover the sins of all. Therefore He pours ointment upon this garment, so that He might also heal the wounds of all. There is also this divine influx upon those dwelling together in peace, like the dew of Hermon, which descends upon Mount Zion. Indeed, dew is a heavenly influx, indeed divine, in which Isaac blessed his sons, saying to each: "In the dew of heaven shall your blessing be." For it descends from heaven, indicated by Hermon, which they interpret as an anathema of sorrow: And here it descends

--- Page 1065 ---
**TONE EIGHT. 461**

dew on Mount Sion, that is, on those who are placed on watchtowers, and in the governance of others: for Sion denotes a watchtower. But if we wish to imitate the more recondite theologians, the dew, which in Hebrew is called טל (tal), by way of numbers carries the surname of a great hidden name, from which all things flow: And thus by the ointment it is indicated that we have an influx of the name, which is properly a poured-out ointment: and by the dew an influx of the surname: so that nothing is lacking to those dwelling together in peace and unity. And explaining more clearly, the prophet adds: For there the Lord commanded blessing and life forever. But what is life, if not eternal blessedness? And what is blessing, if not the gift by which one may attain that blessedness itself? Therefore, those to be introduced to that kingdom of glory are called blessed by the Prince saying: "Come, blessed of my Father." From peace, therefore, one arrives at blessing, and from blessing to life and kingdom, but from life to union, concerning which (as far as is right, and as much as the weakness of our small intellect can achieve) we shall attempt to draw forth something.

**SEVENTEENTH MODULE. UNION.**
On the union of the blessed with God. Unique Harmony

**F**ROM the most sacred paternal treasuries, Jesus, the Son of God, when about to depart from here, had given a pledge of His greatest love towards us, He also bestowed this monument, hidden from almost all human intellects, saying: "Holy Father, keep them in your name, whom you have given me, that they may be one, as we are." And again: "I pray not for these alone, whom I sent to preach, namely the apostles, but also for those who will believe in me through their word, that all may be one, as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, and they in us may be one." By these words He not only explains our future union with God, but also hints at the manner, while He says: "As you, Father, are in me, and I in you." Concerning which union, when Plotinus, the most eminent expounder of Plato's most recondite doctrine, indeed of divine wisdom imbibed by Plato, wished to treat, as far as the prophets had offered, he said: "Therefore, the institution of such mysteries indicates that it forbids revealing it to men not yet initiated and purified." Namely, it forbade revealing what is divine to another, unless it was granted to that person to see it. Hence, because Parmenides said that all things are one, the Peripatetics themselves are truly laughable, because they dispute against all things that Parmenides did not say: and what he did say, they left untouched, firm on its own feet, and utterly unshaken. Aristotle argued (says Simplicius) against the words, not against the meanings of Parmenides, who spoke divinely, and beyond the bounds of natural philosophy: to which Aristotle was devoted in physics. For all things proceeded from the One, and that all things may be the same, it is necessary for them to participate in that One. And just as all things proceeded from the One into many, so all things which tend to return to that One from which they proceeded, necessarily must shed the multitude, which pertains to imagination, discourse,

MMM v
[Marginal note: Theolo.]
[Marginal note: Dauid]
[Marginal note: CHRI STVS.]
[Marginal note: Idem.]
[Marginal note: Plotinus]
[Marginal note: Parme. Peripat.]
[Marginal note: Simpli.]
[Marginal note: Aristot.]

--- Page 1066 ---
CANTICI TERTII

[Marginal note: Aristote.] and senses pertain, through which Aristotle proceeded only: therefore it is not sur-
[Marginal note: CHRISTVS.] prising, if he did not arrive at the One: And just as concerning many things (as the infallible truth testifies) there is disturbance and distraction of the soul: so concerning the One there is gathering and rest: For it says: Martha, you are troubled about many things, but one thing is necessary: namely, the One, in which all things are held collected, lest those seeking rest and happiness should wander about many things. Hence Augustine most excellently says: Why do you wander, little man,
[Marginal note: August.] about many things? Seek the one good, in which are all goods, and it suffices. But it is far different to seek the One, and to tend towards that One, than to become one. Furthermore, that the One is necessary, towards which all ought to tend, almost all wise men affirm. But how those tending towards that One become one with it, few or none have explained, which is also difficult to explain: because it is held among those most recondite mysteries, which it is not lawful for man to speak, except only to those who have experienced that union, either by deed or at least by contemplation. For (in
[Marginal note: Plotinus] says Plotinus, drawing something from the workshop of those who have proven it) the seer himself with that which is seen, is not two, but one, as if it were not properly something seen, but something united. And he himself is one, having no difference within himself, nor again as far as other things are concerned. For in him who thus sees, nothing is moved, neither anger, nor the appetite for anything inferior, since he has already advanced to the heights: But neither reason, nor a certain intelligence, nor entirely himself, if indeed it is lawful to say so. But as if rapt, or entirely occupied by God, he is now established in a certain safe retreat, and in a tranquil state, and utterly immobile. Nor does he in any way deviate from his own essence, nor even reflecting upon himself, since he utterly rests in that which he sees, and
[Marginal note: Paulus.] as if he himself has already become the state: For to this point Paul, still a pilgrim, had arrived (as I think) when he said: "I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me." Who, also rapt at some time into God, testifies that he saw things which it is not lawful for man to speak. But he himself, and others, come to this more excellently and happily, when they have reached the goal of the race, and have been connected by firm adherence to that One, towards which they had always tended: concerning whom the same Paul says: "He who is joined to God becomes one spi-
[Marginal note: Idem. Theolo.] rit with Him." For our theologians say that blessedness is in the vision and fruition of God, and in the firm possession of that happiness itself, and they do not proceed fur-
[Marginal note: Plotinus] ther. But from the Gospel, and from Plotinus, and other wise men, we learn that one also arrives at union with God, seen and loved. For if the seer becomes one with that which is seen (as Plotinus had recently said), more excellently and effectively does the lover become one with the be-
[Marginal note: Idem. Diony.] loved, as Dionysius and very many wise men say: that love is a virtue uniting the lover with the beloved. But ascending higher, just as the speculative or contemplative faculty divests itself of multitude, if it is to contemplate the One, so also the effective (active) and all other progressive powers finally proceed from many to one, just as they proceeded from one into many: by which way a perfect diapason and consummate harmony is achieved. Indeed, they strive to arrive at that One,

--- Page 1067 ---
**EIGHTH TONE.** 462

which (as Plato teaches in Parmenides) is from which all things [come], outside all things, and in all
things; and to which all things tend: so that it is the first and the last, the beginning and the end,  Plato.
as the sacred scriptures testify in many places. If, however, all things by their very nature
tend towards it, they will eventually reach it, lest that inherent appetite be in vain.
Nor will they cease to be what they are, when united with the better, and transformed for the
better, and now having attained their end, living more happily. For this is (says Plotinus)
the life of the Gods, and of divine and happy men, to completely neglect lower  Plotinus
pleasures, which consist in many things, and the flight of the alone to the Alone: For the
thought of these [men] is entirely based on union. But how one may arrive at it,
since the topic is not left untouched, we too will somewhat traverse it. For when the
prophets (he says) arrived at it, full of the spirit of God, they taught by what means
it might be perceived, but in more obscure words, so much so that they could scarcely be understood.
But the wise priest (who, if I am not mistaken) was our chief Christ,
explaining what was veiled, he offered access and entrance, saying: I am the door; through me  CHRI
if anyone enters, he will be saved, and will go out, and will find pastures everywhere. To  STVS.
this vision, therefore, he opened the way, and offered guidance, saying: Blessed are the pure in  Idem.
heart, for they shall see God. Indeed, purity of heart is required,
that we may see and contemplate Him, to whom we ought to be united. But with Him we become
one, when we cast off multiplicity, through a true subjugation of external
things, about which he again says: Blessed are the poor in spirit, that is, desiring nothing external,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven, which is God Himself: To
which also leads the true control and dominion over the animalistic part of man: for then
one enjoys perfect peace, about which it is added: Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called
and shall be sons of God, as John testifies, saying: He gave them power to become children of God,  Ioannes
to those who live not of blood, nor according to the will of the flesh.
But when they have arrived at this, so that now unshaken they feel no injury inflicted,
as if dead to these external things, then, raised above men, and having attained all things,
nothing more is ever to be desired by them. And these are they, concerning whom at the end of that most
profound doctrine he twice repeats, saying: Blessed are those who suffer persecution for
righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: And again: Blessed will
you be, when people revile you and persecute you and utter all kinds of evil against you
falsely on my account: and you will endure it for love of virtue, rejoice then, and be
glad, for your reward is great in heaven. Which reward is indeed He,
who said: I will be your exceeding great reward: and it is abundant, when abundantly  DEVS.
it diffuses itself, and more closely unites lovers with itself in that eternal blessedness and
happiness.

--- Page 1068 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**
[floral ornament] **MODULE EIGHTEEN: FELICITY.** [floral ornament]

Who is happy and blessed. First Harmony.

[Marginal note: Augustine. / Plato.] As for what is considered happy and blessed, Augustine defines it by saying: Blessed is he who has whatever he wants. Plato, however, in the Philebus, does not differ much, when he says: Blessed is he to whom nothing is lacking: But in the Euthydemus, he agrees with Augustine, saying: Felicity is the attainment of things according to one's desires. But no one possesses all the things he desires, unless he adheres to and is united with the source of all good things, from whom he can draw all things at will. Therefore, blessed and happy is he who is united with God, in whom he sees all things, possesses all things, and enjoys all things with a better lot than he perceives in their proper kind:
[Marginal note: Augustine.] although the vision of those things, which by Augustine is called 'vespertina' (evening vision), is not denied, nor their enjoyment, which we declared spurious above, provided that all things are referred to God with that relation and consonance which is fitting. From whose harmony the great glory of the creator is seen, which vibrates and shines in creatures, which well-illuminated eyes contemplate, like those seraphim who (as Isaiah relates) sang, 'Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of hosts, the whole earth is full of His glory.'
[Marginal note: Isaiah.] If this shines in created things, much more happily does it shine in the Creator Himself, whose vision is given to those who, dead to the world and to themselves, live for God alone, who said: 'No man shall see me and live.'
[Marginal note: GOD] It is therefore necessary, if anyone wishes to be happy, that he die the death of the righteous, either through complete separation from the body and conversely, as all the blessed whose souls have attained that celestial glory: Or through the transmutation of the body into a better state, as we read of Elijah, translated in a fiery chariot, his body now changed into the nature of spirit; and as Enoch, who walked with God in soul and body, and was no longer seen by bodily eyes: And as many others whose bodies rose with Christ and entered the holy city, happy together with Him: Or through a temporary departure from the body, as Paul in his rapture; Moses, who saw the Lord face to face; Isaiah, who saw the Lord sitting on a high and exalted throne; and not a few others, whom to enumerate would be too long, not to say impossible.

In what felicity consists. Harmony II.
Although in the first volume we brought forward many opinions of those who wished to define in what felicity and blessedness consist, here, however, determining the matter definitively and conclusively, we say that felicity cannot exist except in God, and not in any external things,
[Marginal note: Aristotle.] as Aristotle wisely decrees in his Politics, saying: 'God is my witness, there is no felicity in external things, because He Himself is happy and uses none of external things.' Here Cicero falls, struck by his own battering ram,
[Marginal note: Cicero.] while he places the blessed life in the emptiness of all things: which must be placed in God alone.

--- Page 1069 ---
**EIGHTH TONE. 463**

Nevertheless, progress towards God sometimes occurs through creatures, as Paul says. [Marginal note: Paul.]
The invisible things of God, understood through those things which have been made, are perceived from the creation of the world: From
which, again, having turned to created things, seeing God, they contemplate the glory of the Creator in them,
feeling wonderful harmonies resulting from both. This turning
to created things is by no means unfavorable, since it does not happen through an aversion from God,
from whom they never depart, but continuously contemplate Him in created things. Now therefore
they are delighted by the vision of God Himself (which is called the midday vision), now they perceive creatures
in Him by the morning vision, but now they behold Him in creatures by the evening vision,
as Augustine has extensively and clearly discussed on Genesis. [Marginal note: Origen. Augustine.]
Nor less profoundly and eloquently does Origen discuss in the second volume against
Celsus in a certain retrograde order: Following whom, we say

--- Page 1070 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

the measure of degrees, and grace, and gifts: and what a diversity of animals and wild beasts, and why individual genera are divided into so many species. Nor will it be hidden by what reason certain wonderful virtues are associated with certain roots or herbs, and by other herbs or roots, on the contrary, they are repelled. Moreover, also concerning those things which happen to men, which do not occur by chance or accident, but by a reason so thoroughly examined and so arduous that it surpasses not only the saints, but perhaps even the number of all men's hairs: and by what reason of providence it extends even to those sparrows which come for a penny, whether sparrows are understood spiritually or literally. And lest [Marginal note: Wisdom] anyone should consider this false or impossible, I will also adduce those things which that possessor of wisdom (as is well-known in the church) asserts of himself, saying: "He himself gave me true knowledge of existing things, that I might know the dispositions of the world, and the virtues of the elements, the beginning, the end, the middle, the changes of times, the courses of the year, the dispositions of the stars, the natures of animals, the wrath of beasts, the force of winds, the thoughts of men, the differences of plants, the virtues of roots, and whatever things are hidden and unforeseen I have learned: For the artificer of all things, Wisdom, taught me." [Marginal note: Mercury] To whom that most wise Mercurius Trismegistus assents, who, having attained his mind (of which we speak), says: "Being inspired by the divine spirit, I became endowed with truth." For we cannot have sincere acuteness unless we have attained the mind, or are illuminated by that supramundane light, or are carried by an ecstasy of mind into the fount of truth, which is the same. [Marginal note: Wise. Paul.] For from the senses or through human inventions (as the wise agree) sincere truth is not to be expected. Therefore the apostle says to the Colossians: "See to it that no one deceives you through philosophy and empty deceit, according to the tradition of men." Therefore, true knowledge is to be expected from the supreme fount of truth with purity of heart. Hence the same Mercurius introduces the Mind speaking to him in these words [Marginal note: Mercury. Mind]: "I am the Mind, that is, the divine splendor illuminating your intellect, for those who are good, pious, pure, religious, and holy: And my presence brings them aid, so that they immediately discern all things." And exhorting his son to grasp this mind, he says: "Whoever are supported by the gift of God, so that they have attained the Mind, they, O Tat, are considered immortal among mortals, according to the comparison of their works, [Marginal note: Idem.] having embraced all things by their understanding, which are on earth, which are in the sea, and whatever else is above heaven: and therefore they raise themselves up to behold that very good, in which they indeed see all things." When they truly perceive this, they consider the life we live here to be a kind of misery: despising indeed both bodies and all corporeal things, they are carried towards the one alone. This, O Tat, is the meaning of the mind, namely the contemplation of divine things, and the understanding of God, the divine crater existing, that is, the soul being disposed to receive in the intellect that splendor from which the mind is formed, having indeed the intellect itself illuminated by divine radiance. Which illumination John indeed

--- Page 1071 ---
EIGHTH TONE. 464

calls it an anointing, saying: "You have an anointing from the Holy One, and you know all things; and you do not need anyone to teach you, for His anointing teaches you about all things." Which anointing, or illumination, or mind is given (as the more secret [Theologians] Theologians say) in the death of the kiss, concerning which the prophet says in Psalm [number omitted]: "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His [David. CHRIST] saints." To which death Christ and [SAINT Paul.] Paul openly provoke us. Indeed, the other mystically says: "Unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit." For it is necessary to die to the world and to the animal man, if one wishes to live to God and to discern those things which pertain to divine life, as [GOD] God Himself testifies, who says: "No man shall see me and live," that is, live an animal life. Therefore [Paul.] Paul says: "Mortify your members"; and again: "You have died, and your life is hidden with Christ." Therefore, a person dying to the senses, in a certain ecstasy and separation of the intellectual faculty from its engagement with sensible things, is elevated into God, where he sees all things. Which, even while still pilgrims, they attain by the gift of God, provided they have become pure in heart, as the supreme [CHRIST] Truth teaches. From whose workshop, [Plotinus] Plotinus says: "Those who are pure, dwelling with themselves, having no impediment to becoming one, but having become divine, beautiful, and God-like, then ascend into the Mind where they contemplate all beautiful forms, and recognize them to be the ideas which indicate the true essences and quiddities of things." To this had come the prophets, Paul, and he who said: "What we have heard and touched concerning the word of life, this we announce to you"; and again: "We have seen His glory, glory [Paul.] as of the only begotten from the Father." In which Word, since all things shine and have their exemplars there, consequently all things are beheld there. But this way, familiar to the ancients, and known even to some, or very few, of our time, who can say with the [David.] prophet: "You have made known to me the ways of life"; is, however, utterly obliterated among the common people, each one being addicted to his own concupiscence, or to doctrine perceived by the senses, which do not at all reach such things, being entirely alien to them. Hence, to them it seems hard, strange, and perhaps deviating from the truth and inaccessible (as they say) for this present state. Therefore, for them it is enough to await the time when our heavy body will be reformed and made conformable to the body of Christ's glory; which they estimate will happen only after the resurrection and in the state of glory, not paying attention to what the saints attest: and how (as authentic scripture testifies) some, while still pilgrims, have seen these things, speaking with God face to face: as it is said of Moses, and of Jacob, and of others through other words. Since, therefore, all agree that this perfect knowledge will be given to those who have diligently applied themselves to the goal of the race, we will also briefly discuss them.

--- Page 1072 ---
**THIRD CANTICLE**
**To whom perfect happiness is given. Con. III.**

**E**T if to those living in this life an entrance is sometimes given to the paradise of delights, where we can eat of all the trees planted there, and delight in that which [Marginal note: Paulus.] Paul, and other wise Hebrews call the future age, nevertheless, its perfect [Marginal note: Paulus.] possession is given to those who have completed the course of life. For before, even very few [Marginal note: Hebręi.] perfectly initiated in such things arrive there, as Paul himself, with the Hebrews not moderately instructed in this matter, says: "But solid food is for the perfect, for those who by reason of custom have their senses exercised to discern good and evil." Therefore, speaking with these, we will interpose the introductory discourses of Christ, which indeed are about works of penance, baptism, the authority to absolve, the resurrection of the dead, and such like: so that we may be carried to perfect doctrine among the perfect, and to those who have become partakers of the Holy Spirit, to be communicated in such a way: in which is treated the heavenly gift, the hidden manna, the better word of God, namely, that which is hidden and to be communicated to the perfect, and concerning the virtues of the coming age: To which (God helping) when we arrive, then we see, even as pilgrims, at least in part, those things which are hidden: But if, freed from the body, we are carried to God, then that which is in part is made void, the perfect having been attained, in which we are fully blessed: But whether the soul, freed from this bodily mass, immediately reaches the goal and end to which it will eventually come, or if it still progresses, [Marginal note: Theolo.] there is a varied opinion among the wise: For more recent theologians incline towards the former opinion: But Origen, and with him other wise men, are of the opinion that [Marginal note: Orige.] the blessed still progress, [Marginal note: Celsus.] as he, in a long discourse against Celsus, says: "When the saints arrive at the heavenly places, then they will know more amply and perfectly what they did in their pilgrimage." In which knowledge, rational nature will grow through individual things, not as in the flesh, or body and soul, in which life grew, but the mind, now initiated, augmented in mind and sense, is led to perfect knowledge, by no means to be hindered in the future by these carnal senses, but augmented by intellectual increments, always with every veil removed, and purely (so to speak) face to face will contemplate the causes of things: where it will first attain that perfection by which it ascended to Him, and then that by which it remains: having as food, by which it may feed, theorems, and the understanding of things, and the reasons of causes: For just as our bodies in this life, by the aid of food, while we are still in our youthful years, continuously grow and are fully perfected: but when nature has brought them to their full stature with suitable proportions, we use food, no longer to grow, but to live and be preserved in life through sustenance. So I believe the mind, even when it has come to perfection, nevertheless feeds and uses its own proper and competent foods in that measure, to which nothing should be lacking, nor should it abound. But in all things, this food is to be understood as contemplation, and

--- Page 1073 ---
TOMVS OCTAVVS. 465

the understanding of God, having its own proper and suitable measures for this nature, which has been made and created; which measures each individual, beginning to see God and understand Him through purity of heart, must observe. This progress, indeed (in my judgment), the Apostle wished to show you, where after he discussed the ascent on high, and captivity led away by Christ, and about the degrees distributed in the church, by which some were made Apostles: others Evangelists, others doctors, and of this kind, he adds: Until we all meet in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, that we may no longer be children tossed to and fro, and carried about by every wind of doctrine. [Marginal note: Paulus. CHRI STVS.]
However, if anyone asserts that there is no progress in the heavenly homeland, because on the journey each person reaches the measure destined for them (as the doctors of the Church commonly hold, and we are with the Church and with Christ here and everywhere); nevertheless, it seems to some (unless this contradicts the truth) that those adhering to the infinite always draw from it the means by which they grow, until they become one with it, as we hinted above, and then, having attained the perfect portion by which they grow, they rest in peace in that very thing. For (as they say) if anything obscene and unclean defiles those who have completed the course of life, they have a place in which they may be purged, before they come to that light illuminating and perfecting, lest the very weak and infirm be offended by its clarity. Thus the eye must be accustomed, before it fixes its gaze on that most full light: because (as Plotinus says) an eye infected with filth, not yet well purged, or weak, if it is directed towards a most pleasant spectacle, will immediately grow dim: for it is necessary for the one who is to see, to first become akin and similar by seeing, before it is applied to seeing: For the eye would never see the sun, unless it became solar: nor again will the soul, unless it becomes beautiful and divine, behold beauty itself, and God: nor will it receive light unless it becomes luminous and clear. [Marginal note: Plotinus]
Hence Solomon in Proverbs says: The path of the just shines like light, going forth, or progressing and shining unto the perfect day. Hence concerning the most blessed Christ it is said: But the child grew, and was strengthened, full of wisdom: And again: And JESUS advanced in wisdom, age, and grace with God, and men. Nor should it be said that that progress was according to appearance, because they would accuse scripture of falsehood when it itself says, that he progressed in wisdom, not in appearance, nor only for the sight of men. Nor does he solve it well, who says that he progressed by experience: because there it is said, that he progressed in wisdom: For scripture itself never speaks incongruously, except by the fault of the translator. Therefore, that man, even united with God, progressed, just as he deserved, up to that fullness to which the Father had preordained. [Marginal note: Salomon]
The just also grow up to that same perfection, which is noon, or the 'meridional vision,' as Augustine called it, when the blessed clearly beholds God face to face as He is. In this vision there is infinite breadth, just as the object seen is infinite. Nor should those who hold this opinion consider the state and progress of the blessed as inconvenient: for it is indeed a state in which none of them can fall in any way; but progress, however, when always [Marginal note: Augusti.]

NNN

--- Page 1074 ---
**CANTICI TERTII**

**Petrus.** Let them become more intimate with God, until they become one with Him: whence even angels (as Peter says) desire to look into God. For they desire what they do not yet have, nor do they desire in vain, because they would be defrauded of their desire and would grieve, which is contrary to the nature of blessedness. Therefore, it seems that they sometimes obtain what they do not yet possess, even though they are blessed.
**Theolo.** Or if it is asserted (as theologians commonly believe) that the blessed, immediately introduced to that vision, are found at an already predetermined end, so that they do not progress further or become more intimate with God, since, once introduced there, they are already perfectly blessed. But however that may be, perfect happiness is given to those who have already reached the ultimate goal of their progress, and the full measure according to their capacity, so that they cannot receive more. And this is what is said:
**CHR-** "Ask, and you will receive, so that your joy may be full."
**STVS.**

[Three leaf-like ornaments] **NINTH MODULE. ALL GOOD.**
*What the good is, which is called the supreme and true good. A single harmony.*

[Decorative initial V in a square frame] Since no dispute can be made about that which is not subject to the senses, or to composite reasons, because it is most simple, therefore a simple discourse must be made about it, taught only by divine light, just as true wise men instruct us. For Trismegistus, imbued with that very light, says: "God is goodness itself, and nothing else besides goodness; all other things are distinct from the very nature of goodness. Indeed, body and soul, since they are finite, have no place by which they can grasp goodness, because goodness is as vast as the existence of all corporeal and incorporeal, sensible and intelligible things, and that which is above all existing things. Beware, therefore, lest you ever say that anything else is good; for it would be a profane error, according to that which the supreme teacher says:
**CHRI-** "No one is good except God alone." Nor must it be said that God is indeed anything other than the sole good, because into the same impiety

--- Page 1075 ---
**VOLUME EIGHT. 466**

He extends all things, nor does He receive anything: but man and all things together with him receive all things, but give nothing: therefore none of these can be called good. Christ therefore, in that He had received all things from the Father, did not wish to be called good: but in that He gave, He performed the office of good. Therefore God is all good, and the supreme good, receiving nothing, because He needs none of our goods, but gives to all, that they may be good, as the Divine lyre-player sings, saying: "When you open your hand, all things will be filled with goodness." [Marginal note: David] And this is true humility, and true self-knowledge, to understand oneself to be pure nothing, and to have received all things from God, and to be what they are from this, inasmuch as God diffuses Himself into them: And he who participates more in God, is better, since God is good itself: and is more beautiful, since God is beauty itself. For this is (as Dionysius and the Academics teach) true beauty, to participate, namely, in the supreme beautiful: and true goodness, to participate in the supreme good, just as true being is, insofar as it participates in that which is from itself, and the supreme being, as is most commonly held in all schools: [Marginal note: Diony: Academ:] For (as the same Dionysius says) because God is substantial good, He extends His goodness to all existing things, just as the sun by its being illuminates all things which can participate in its light. [Marginal note: Diony:] Therefore the supreme good, through its very essence, sends forth the rays of all goodness to all existing things by a certain measure and wonderful proportion. Not otherwise does he say a little further down about beauty: [Marginal note: Idem] For the most beautiful itself, and always above beauty, and existing in every part, is the cause of all beautiful things. From this beautiful, therefore, it comes to all existing things that each one is beautiful in its own way: And this beautiful creates the congruities, and friendships, and societies of all things: and to this beautiful, as to an efficient cause and end of all things, all things pertain: for all things exist for the sake of the beautiful. It is also the exemplar, and goal, by which all things are defined. And the same is beautiful and good, which all things desire, and to which all things are related, because there is nothing in the substances of things that is not in some way a participant of the beautiful and the good. And since it is the primary and immense fount, from which all things desire to receive, therefore all things (as the great Theodorus says in Proclus) pray except the first itself, because all things are in need: [Marginal note: Theologian] And while they know that they ought to receive from Him those things of which they are in need, they ask Him: Hence the supreme teacher Christ taught that we should direct our prayer to the Father, from whom every good gift and every perfect gift comes, when He says: [Marginal note: CHRIST] "When you pray, say: Our Father, who art in heaven." And we must always pray until the measure of gifts, which are prepared for us, is completed, and until our joy is full. For then nothing remains that we can obtain, but prayers are poured out of charity for others, that they may obtain what we have already obtained. And therefore (as John testifies) the Saints pray, and the Son of God Himself: [Marginal note: John] "If anyone," He says, "has sinned, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the propitiator for our sins, and for the sins of the whole world," To whom Paul assents, saying: "Jesus entered into heaven itself, to appear before the face of God for us, and as a true mediator, to bring all things back to the supreme good itself," [Marginal note: Paul.]
NNN ij

--- Page 1076 ---
**OF THE THIRD CANTICLE**
as much as they have receded from it, and become one with it through true union, just as they were in the exemplar and in the archetype of the good.

**TWENTIETH MODULE: SILENCE.**
Concerning pause, rest, and silence, to which one arrives once the good, towards which we strive, has already been attained.

[Illuminated initial V] When therefore we have arrived at the first and highest, one must rest, nor must one proceed further, since nothing beyond the highest can be given. And this which Jeremiah says: "He shall sit solitary and be silent, because he has lifted himself above himself." By these words is declared rest in that which he says, "He shall sit"; divestment from the multitude, because he says, "Solitary"; silence, while he says: "he shall be silent"; and transformation into God in that which he concludes: "And he shall lift himself above himself." For above man there is nothing but God. In harmony the prophet sings, saying: "In peace, in the same, I will sleep and rest." With this said, let him be silent, because he has now arrived at the place where there is silence, inasmuch as there each one has become most intimate, and most intimate with the highest, so much so that, having forgotten all external things

--- Page 1077 ---
TONE EIGHT. 467

your traces will not be known, namely by natural light: Therefore Isaiah follows: But [Marginal note: Isaiah.]
in lights, or splendors (for which we have 'in doctrines') they will glorify
the Lord: For in the islands of the sea, the name of the Lord Israel: from the ends or from the wings of the earth
we have heard praises, namely those to come for you, the just one: for which we have, 'the glory
of the just one'. However, the Septuagint interprets that 'to you' as 'appearance': but properly it signifies 'pleasant'
and 'preeminent': and the meaning is: Preeminent praise and joy will be for the just one,
that is, the Messiah, who alone among mortals was found just. But when he seemed
to himself to have spoken too openly, he immediately added: My secret to me, my secret
to me: Woe is me, because indeed I have spoken so openly. Afterwards he turned
his discourse to another matter. The Psalmist also hints at this by silence, saying: [Marginal note: Psalm.]
I have hidden your words in my heart, that I might not sin against you: for to hide is to be silent: But
that it is alien to the duty of a good man to reveal divine secrets, Mercury [Marginal note: Mercury.]
declares to Asclepius, when he says: It is of an irreligious mind to make public to the consciousness of many
a treatise full of the entire majesty of the divine, because the profound utterances
and mysteries of God become too cheap in weak souls: therefore the greatest teacher said: [Marginal note: CHRIST]
Do not give what is holy to dogs, and do not cast your pearls before swine, namely
by revealing God's most precious secrets to the unworthy and incapable. Add to this that sometimes,
out of reverence (as Mercury says), silence offers a fertile pregnancy
of truth, so that in its proper place, he who has preserved those
secrets with reverence may speak all the more effectively and sublimely, the more faithful a servant he has been in concealing them. Acceptable
ones are also found more to praise the ineffable in silence than those who unworthily utter something,
stained by deceit contrary to true praise. Therefore, the soul, with senses closed,
which are delighted by colors, odors, tastes, sounds, and sensations, and with the discourse
of reason closed, whose food and sustenance is truth and the knowledge of lower
things, and gathered entirely at the apex of the mind, whose food is also supramundane
light, is silent to others: and, being free, speaks to that one alone who is the supreme and unique good, and
renders praises: Let us also (as far as it is right to reveal) render a hymn to God, the best and greatest.

A Hymn to be rendered in silence to God alone with a pure and elevated mind.

**T**o You, Holy Lord, and supreme King of all, praise is due,
which no one can render, since You are immense, eternal, and ineffable:
Therefore, if not worthy, yet as much as is right for me, and as much as
my strength allows, indeed, as much as You, speaking within me, shall command, I will render it.
You, enclosed by no boundary, circumscribed by no reason, and accessible to none, containing all things
within Yourself, and existing as the cause of all things, and though existing in all things, yet You are so
separated from all things that the human mind can neither speak nor think of You, unless
Your light has infused it. You are indeed the Father of all, pure and
inaccessible light, profound fount, hidden creator, whom no one knows except the Son, and
to whom the Son wishes to reveal Him. You are the fount of wisdom from whom are all things, and the eternal
NNN iij

--- Page 1078 ---
CANTICLE THE THIRD

Indeed, carrying all things, a hidden dwelling in things, being, life, foundation, & beginning of all things & end, You, holy, blessed, the very high God, seal, form, spirit, bond, & life of the world: Great are You, & very praiseworthy, & of Your greatness there is no end: For You, with that immense goodness by which You created, by the same You also preserve all things, & with Your arm You protect all things: And You are the origin from which every light shines, & every good arises: You are powerful, & who resists You? You search the reins & hearts, with just and most holy judgment You render to each according to their works, permitting nothing unpunished: Yours is beauty, truth, & life, measure, & standard of things, a shining mirror, in which all things become clear: & most beautiful light, by which all things become beautiful: Generous, & pious in all things, slow to anger, & of ample mercy. To You what was, what is, & what will be are the same: For in You is the present life, & the future age, in which both all time, & every end is concluded, because You are the end of all: You, true God, without movement ascending to Your sublimity, & descending to us, & to the lowest things, as a foundation You sustain all things, & You are the adornment of all: You, living God, life of the world, author of the covenant, tree of knowledge, truth, & seal of the world, fount of souls & forms, peace of all, union, & bond of all: You, king of the universe, prince of the world, justice, & its rule, God of the elect, & their guardian, and the eye seeing all things, most holy dwelling, & guest in us, transferring Yourself into holy souls, so that transforming them into Your image You may lead them back to that from which they came, & they may be able to do all things with You.

And let him who is wise understand these things, for this is the hidden manna, which no one knows, except he who receives it: whence it is least permitted to speak of such things: For these things are not perceived by vocal hearing, but by that eternal light, by which those words are conceived, which are to be hidden in the heart, lest as unfaithful & unworthy praisers we sin before the king, whose sacrament it is good to hide: which we can neither reveal, because it is ineffable: Therefore, since words are insufficient, He is to be praised in silence, with a pure & fervent heart: for in silence, & hope will be our strength, says the oracle: with which that of Jeremiah especially agrees: 'It is good to wait in silence, until seeing face to face as He is, our true tongue may be loosed in due praises, as it is again written: "Those who dwell in Your house will praise You forever and ever." Amen.

THE END.

--- Page 1079 ---
and time, and every end is concluded, because you are the end of all things: You, true God, without movement ascending to your sublimity, and descending to us, and to the lowest things, as a foundation you sustain all things, and you are the beauty of all: You, living God, life of the world, author of the covenant, tree of knowledge, truth, and seal of the world, fount of souls and forms, peace of all, union, and bond of all: You, king of the universe, prince of the world, justice, and its rule, God of the elect, and their guardian, and eye seeing all things, most holy dwelling and guest in us, transferring yourself into holy souls, so that transforming them into your image, you may lead them back to that from which they came, and they may be able to do all things with you. And let him who is wise understand these things, for this is the hidden manna, which no one knows except he who receives it: whence it is by no means permitted to speak of such things: For these things are not perceived by vocal hearing, but by that eternal light, by which those words are conceived, which are to be hidden in the heart, lest as unfaithful and unworthy praisers we sin before the king, whose secret it is good to hide: which we can neither reveal, because it is ineffable: Therefore, since words are not sufficient, he is to be praised in silence, with a pure and fervent heart: for in silence and hope shall be our strength, says the oracle: with which that of Jeremiah most greatly agrees: It is good to wait in silence, until seeing face to face as He is, our true tongue may be loosed in due praises, just as it is again written: Those who dwell in your house shall praise you forever and ever. Amen.

F I N I S....

--- Page 1080 ---
[Drawing of an artist's palette with two brushes]

Original in color
NF Z 43-120-8

[Rectangular border containing the following text:]

NATIONAL LIBRARY

[Graphic of a leaf]

CHÂTEAU
of
SABLÉ

1985
