--- Page 1 ---
The image provided shows a blank page with no visible text. Therefore, there is no Latin text to translate on this page.

--- Page 2 ---
Natural History.
42 A

--- Page 3 ---
[The page appears to be blank or the text is too faded to be legible. There are no discernible Latin words or characters.]

[A small brown stain is visible near the top center.]
[The paper is textured and shows signs of age, such as foxing and visible fibers.]
[A vertical line is visible along the right edge, possibly indicating the binding of the book.]

**Previous page text for continuity:**
[A dark, metallic object, possibly a ruler or bookmark, is placed vertically on the left side of the page.]

Nat.
42 A

--- Page 4 ---
There is no legible Latin text present on the provided image or the "Previous page text." Both appear to be blank or too faded to discern any characters.

Therefore, no translation can be provided.

--- Page 5 ---
The provided image shows a blank page of an old book, and the accompanying description explicitly states: "There is no legible Latin text present to transcribe."

Therefore, there is no Latin text to translate on this page.

--- Page 6 ---
There is no Latin text to translate on the provided pages. Both the current page and the previous page are described as blank.

--- Page 7 ---
This page appears to be a blank flyleaf or the reverse side of a page from an old book. It consists primarily of textured, handmade paper with some foxing and visible fibers.

[On the right edge, there is a fragment of an engraving showing vertical hatching and decorative scrollwork.]

[At the very bottom right corner, there is an extremely faint, almost illegible stamp or printed text that appears to read:]
FROM THE BOOKS

--- Page 8 ---
This page is blank and contains no Latin text to translate.

However, for continuity with the previous page, the Latin phrase "EX LIBRIS" found there translates to:

**FROM THE LIBRARY OF**

--- Page 9 ---
*Fr. Bacon of Verulam*
**WOODS OF WOODS,**
*Or*
**NATURAL HISTORY,**
*And*
**NEW ATLAS.**

**AMSTERDAM,**
*By Louis Elzevir. In the year 1648.*

--- Page 10 ---
By Francis Bacon of Verulam
FOREST OF FORESTS
or
NATURAL HISTORY
And
NEW ATLAS.

AMSTERDAM
By Louis Elzevir. 1648.

--- Page 11 ---
**S Y L V A**
**S Y L V A R U M,**
Or
**N A T U R A L**
**H I S T O R Y,**
divided into ten Centuries,
formerly written in English
By
FRANCIS BACON,
Baron VERULAM, Viscount
ST. ALBAN, formerly
Chancellor of England:
Now
translated into Latin
by
JACOB GRUTER, P. F.
Candidate of Medicine.

--- Page 12 ---
Franc. Bacon, Book 3, Chapter 4, on the Advancement of Learning.

One is moved to wonder at Aristotle's boldness, who, driven by a certain impulse of contradiction, and declaring war on all Antiquity, not only usurped the liberty of coining new terms of art at will; but also strove to extinguish and destroy all ancient wisdom. So much so that he nowhere names ancient authors, nor makes any mention of their doctrines, except where he might censure men or refute their tenets.

A little after.

Concerning a man so excellent indeed, and admirable for the sharpness of his intellect, Aristotle, I would readily believe that he received this ambition from his disciple, whom perhaps he emulated; so that if the former subdued all Nations, the latter might subdue all Opinions, and establish for himself a kind of Monarchy in Contemplations,
A fortunate plunderer of doctrine, not a useful example given to the world. ———

--- Page 13 ---
Nobiliſſimo, Conſultiſſimo,
Doctiſſimoque Viro,

PETRO REYGERSBERGIO
JC^to Couvvervæ Domino, &c.

IACOBVS GRVTERVS
S.

Nobiliſſime Domine,

[Large decorative initial A] It is not my intention
to crown with ivy your ancestral
virtues, which, derived through a lineage
celebrated for its achievements and honors,
have settled upon you with augmented
splendor. To your benevolence towards us,
and to the testimony of your most sincere
affection, shown not just once, some
expression of a grateful mind was due.
And while that awaits an opportunity
to be rendered more fully, by this, as it
were, a public pledge, I offer...
        * 3                ob-

--- Page 14 ---
**DEDICATION.**
...publicly to acknowledge myself bound. A trifle, I confess, is what I offer, and it bears only the title of a translation; but it hopes for some splendor from the author and your patronage; who both love all kinds of studies, and are accustomed to benignly embrace the efforts of rising genius. More worthy things and things equal to your Name to be extolled did not occur from the meager assessment of our progress. Therefore, while I strive even thus to prove my diligence and faithfulness to readers, I also wished this to stand as a pledge of our veneration for you. Farewell, Most Noble Lord, and may you long survive for the praises of your family and your own, from the hereditary clientage of the Muses. Middelburg, Zeeland. Kalends of September, 1648.
        I N T E R -

--- Page 15 ---
[Decorative headpiece: A woodcut ornament featuring a central grotesque mask surrounded by symmetrical foliage, flowers, and fruit.]

THE TRANSLATOR
TO THE READER.

[Decorative initial F]RANCIS BACON of Ve-
rulam's *Natural Histo-*
*ry* has long been a work sought
after in Latin. Printers have often
earnestly solicited its translation, even
with a price. Hitherto, the variety
of the subject matter, entangled with
many difficulties, has deterred
everyone; it would also exhaust
Englishmen and scholars. No
confidence in my studies, of which the
harvest is barely in the blade, nor a
deeper knowledge of the English
language, drove me to this, but rather
fortune; whether it will turn out well
or ill, is up to you, kind
          * 4               Reader;

--- Page 16 ---
**Previous page text for continuity:**
[Decorative headpiece: A woodcut ornament featuring a central grotesque mask surrounded by symmetrical foliage, flowers, and fruit.]

THE INTERPRETER
TO THE READER.

[Decorative initial F]RANCIS BACON of Verulam's *Natural History* has long been a work desired in Latin. Printers have more than once earnestly solicited its translation, even with payment. Hitherto, the variety of the subject, entangled with many difficulties, has deterred everyone; it would also weary Englishmen and scholars. No confidence in my studies, the harvest of which is scarcely in the blade, nor a deeper knowledge of the English language, but fortune, impelled me here; whether it will turn out well or ill, rests with you, kind Reader;

---

TO THE READER.
Reader, if you would allow my efforts, conscious of their own slightness, and never destined for the press, yet brought here by the gentle importunity of friends, from which I cannot now withdraw, to find safety in the hope of your pardon; while I am unwilling that Latin philosophical audiences should longer be without the work of that Illustrious Man, a work most useful for constructing the rules of Physics, which brings it into line with Nature. For after I decided to devote the leisure, cut off from occupations and relaxations, to the exercises of the pen, seeking real things, so to speak, and somewhat removed from the incorporeal noise of words, I stumbled upon these, indeed most pleasant, and opportune for fostering my medical studies; but elsewhere not rarely intricate to one translating, indeed even desperate, unless most learned—

--- Page 17 ---
L E C T O R I .
*...indeed even desperate, unless the kindness*
*of very learned men (whose names are too*
*distinguished to be affixed to this vestibule)*
*had repeatedly extended a helping hand. Having*
*struggled through the whole course of difficulties, when the*
*papers, now reduced to a volume, came*
*into the hands of those whom it would be a matter*
*of conscience for me not to obey, I immediately*
*felt measures being taken, until it was no longer*
*permitted for the fruits of my diligence to be*
*private. Thus therefore I finally come forth,*
*with the work of a Latin interpreter for Bacon having been*
*diligently performed; which work indeed feared to be called*
*a servile herd, and took care not to translate*
*word for word; but that a freer style might*
*render clarity unclouded to the attentive reader;*
*which style itself does not everywhere run with*
*the same thread, in some places more concise, in others more expansive; so that*
          * 5                                  for-*

--- Page 18 ---
L E C T O R I.
perhaps it might render a varied likeness of our former reading. Nor yet do I dare to promise that I have completely achieved what I diligently pursued. Indeed, some things will be found which will easily testify how I have not everywhere satisfied myself. Thus you will see some English additions on the pages, even where Latin is not lacking; sometimes even where I despaired of being able to express it. But here and there, kind Reader, I expect from you a remedy for the faulty passages; if perchance, through the benevolence of the learned age, the hope of a second and more improved edition will not have been unreasonable, and in a difficult work and in rendering into Latin matters of nature so remote, some ignorance is beyond blame, indeed, if even a slumbering attention errs within the hope of pardon.

--- Page 19 ---
L E C T O R I.
...attention. The New Atlas is from Bacon's own Roman workshop. Farewell, Reader, and favor him who attempts this first sea voyage not without fear of shipwreck. The rest, which contribute to explaining the author's purpose more closely, the following Preface by Rawley will say.

[decorative ornament]

* 6          W. Ra-

--- Page 20 ---
W. RAWLEY
PREFACE
*translated from English.*

[Decorative initial C]Since my Lord author has not dis-
dained my humble effort in this
collection, I feel publicly obliged,
so that (with his assent) I may pre-
pare the way for the Reader, by in-
dicating those things which concern
both the form of the work and its
publication. I remember it often
being said by him in conversations,
that if he had consulted only his
own reputation, it would have been
better to consign the *Natural Histo-*
*ry* to private obscurity, than to pub-
lish it *to be worn out by individual
public use*. For it seems merely an
undigested mass of particulars, lack-
ing that splendor which a precisely
observed *Method* usually bestows
upon books. But that the concern
for his own honor has prevailed over
whatever of man-
                                      kind

--- Page 21 ---
P R E F A C E.
might serve the advantages and security of mankind. Nor was he unaware that no other way remained by which human intellect might be brought into freedom, bound and enchanted by the fallacies of notions and speculations, which utterly destroy the good fruit of operations; but that above all, deference must be paid to sense and experiments, at least at the beginning. Moreover, he was obliged to provide an example of Natural History, as if it were the designated third part of his Instauration. My Lord repeatedly stated that many of the things which he would include in this writing, men would consider to be base, unworthy, merely curious, and feigning utility. Therefore it is to be wished that they should constantly keep in mind what is now to be done, and what difference there is between this Natural History and the scholarly works of others in this field. For whatever of this subject

--- Page 22 ---
P R A E F A T I O.
Whatever indeed is read on this subject indulges in the pleasantness of descriptions and showy treatises, affectedly peddling miracles that rarely occur and secrets. But our hero composed a Natural History, from whose foundation true philosophy may be awakened, which may both illuminate the intellect with a torch, favor the construction of axioms, and play the principal role in the direction of works. For thus he believes he has discharged his bounden duty, by extending the boundaries of the sciences and faithfully attending to their growth. Since he has here gathered material suited for the structure, and in the New Organon (whose second part shortly awaits the public Reader) has suggested instruments and rules, men will have been unjust to themselves, unless they raise the arts to that pinnacle of perfection to which human ingenuity can attain. And hence sometimes arose my Lord's complaints, when he had dis-
charged

--- Page 23 ---
P R E F A C E.
he thought himself soon also to be driven to the lowest labors of a workman, indeed (following the example of the Israelites after their exodus from Egypt) to collect straw through the fields and burn bricks. For he was convinced that it was in vain to hope for anything from others, men being hardened in their stubborn contempt for what they had received that would be beneficial. As for the fact that the dignity of experiments is not everywhere established according to the opinion of some, indeed becoming worthless elsewhere, it must be considered that they are honorable enough insofar as they acknowledge God as their author. If they are criticized as if they were obvious, it must be known that clear experiments, free from all doubts, provide illumination for the solid structure of axioms. It was also customary for our Hero to render what presents itself as admirable most clearly explained, and not to arrange things of this kind so that they might appear admirable. Moreover, experiments into minute

--- Page 24 ---
P R E F A C E.
te details should be broken down, he used to say, lest
they remain whole, and such as they were at their ori-
gin. Regarding their use; the distinction of experi-
ments, often repeated by my Lord, whereby some are
called fruit-bearing, others light-bearing; and he
thought that whoever acknowledged no use of light, because it is diffused
immate-rially, did not have a sound mind. Furthermore, expe-
riments elsewhere have reasons appended, so that the work of inter-
preting Nature, which is being undertaken, and the axioms to be elicited,
might be more readily available. He considered the causes given by himself
to be more soli-
d than those usually given by others: not
because he boasted of any excellence of intellect above others (as he used
to say), but because of his familiarity with Nature and experi-
ments. More-over, by scattering causes, he did not want men
(who impatiently bear being stopped by ignorance of causes as if by an obstacle)
to wander endlessly in a vast forest, but to dwell on them for a little while
                                        until

--- Page 25 ---
P R E F A C E.
until more certain and more reliable axi-
oms emerge. I also have this from
my Lord's private conversations,
that he interrupted the series of his
methodical work, and did not wish to fulfill the law of strict or-
der (although a certain hidden or-
der will not easily escape the Reader's atten-
tion), so that anyone might con-
ceive the confidence of attempting something similar
and devote effort to collecting experiments.
If he had arranged his material more meticulously,
the useful labor of imitators would have been cut short by the despair of achieving
such an endeavor. How scrupulously
indeed he urges method, the book
"On the Advancement of the Sciences" will prove,
following that thread of order (if
I am not mistaken), which scarcely anyone else could have ren-
dered more exact, or I am greatly mistaken.
My Lord's saying will close the preface,
that the world is exhibited here as it
is in itself and as the work of God, with all
rashness and license of imagination pro-
scribed.
                                        R E A D E R-

--- Page 26 ---
[Decorative headpiece]

T O T H E R E A D E R,
GREETINGS.

[Large decorative initial I] Once I came across a French book, titled *Histoire Naturelle de Mre. François Bacon, &c.* And because in its Preface I remembered there were certain things not unrelated to this place, I wished also to offer these to the judgment of the Reader. Thus, however, stand the French words, soon to be translated into Latin:

   Je seray bien aise aussi que le
Lecteur soit averty qu’en cette tra-
duction je n’ay pas suivy ponctuel-
lement l’ordre observé dedans l’o-
riginal Anglois, pour avoir trou-
vé trop de confusion en la disposi-
tion des matieres, qui semblent
                                   avoir

--- Page 27 ---
L E C T O R I .
avoir eſté diſperſees en pluſieurs
endroits, pluſtoſt, par caprice que
par raiſon. Outre qu'ayant eſté aidé
de la pluſpart des manuſcrits de
l'Auteur, j'ay juge neceſſaire d'y
adjouſter ou diminuer beaucoup de
choſes qui avoient eſté obmiſes ou
augmentees par l'Auſmonier de
Monſieur Bacon, qui apres la mort
de ſon Maiſtre fit imprimer confu-
ſement tous les papiers qu'il trouva
dans ſon Cabinet. Je dis cecy, a fin
que ceux qui entendent la langue
Angloiſe ne m'accuſent point d'in-
fidelité, quand ils rencontreront
dedans ma verſion beaucoup de
choſes qu'ils ne trouveront pas de-
dans l'Originel.

S E N S V S E S T .
I also wished the Reader to be advised, that in this translation I have not exactly followed the order which the English original presents,

--- Page 28 ---
L E C T O R I.
TO THE READER.
...the order which the English exemplar presents, because it has manifest confusion in the arrangement of things, scattered in various places, more by chance than from a certain reason. Moreover, having been aided by the greater part of the papers which the author left in manuscript, I judged it necessary to add or remove several things, omitted or added by Bacon's Almoner, who, after the death of his Lord, confusedly subjected to the press whatever he found of this subject in his study. This I attest here, lest those who understand the English language accuse my fidelity, if they find more things in my version which the autograph entirely lacks.

[A decorative fleuron ornament]

J A C O-

--- Page 29 ---
[Decorative headpiece with floral and mask motifs]

TO JACOB GRUTER,
His Brother,
ISAAC GRUTER
Sends Greetings.

[Decorative initial R] EM, my Brother, you have undertaken a task which, while easily to be approved by fair judges of things, will nevertheless be troubled by harsher judgments when you encounter ill-disposed censors, who form a large part of our age. From this crowd, those who will receive you most mildly will declare this whole kind of translation useless, which bestows upon the Latin world writers so far removed from Antiquity by their origins, as much as they differ in spirit from the genius that makes books enduring. But there was no reason why malice, scrutinizing every hidden fault, should deter you from your undertakings, even if you are erring (if perchance) by following greater examples, whose authority in literature is bene-

--- Page 30 ---
will charitably defend the expenditure of your leisure. For, eager to temper your pauses from reading with writing, you drew the lines of your pen, and (as the saying goes) furrows in fertile dust, choosing the field of your Physical and Medical studies, establishing a union of charm and rigor, and an interplay of content and style. Thus you took a holiday from poring over authors, with a subtle shift in your literary diligence, so that an account of your studies in another genre might be established for you; and yet reading does not complain that anything has been withheld from it, for it finds its own place even in writing. I am a witness that the hope of glory – which perhaps by others here would be contended for more boastfully, or at least pursued more ambitiously – was not your aim, if in a brother's business a brother is to be heard as a fitting witness (οἰκεῖος μάρτυς). Offered to the public, and not merely privately inspected by foolish judges, these works seemed unlikely to be unwelcome to the schools of philosophers; yet you refused publication, which others would eagerly press for—

--- Page 31 ---
...you refusing publication, which others
urged. I joined those who, from their retreats,
fleeing the cares of the world, and establishing
them, deemed it necessary to bring you forth,
since everything of that Man, to whom you have
now rendered the service of a Latin interpreter,
had always pleased me with a very widespread,
as it were, applause. Here, the method of refined
discussion pleased me, in its selected variety of
argument diffused through many subjects. It was
far removed from the narrow confines of the modern
Peripatetics, who fabricate notions rarely in
agreement with Nature. Nor, however, do I think
*Verulamium* surpassed the mists of human
intellect, so that, established in clarity, he always
had things he could present as certain. He led
the way, for the aroused industry of others to
follow, which will pay tribute to diligence, wherever
either explored novelty will expand the boundaries
of knowledge, or doubts inextricable to predecessors
will receive light from the good fortune of a
succeeding age. But this is the subject matter of
your dissertation, into which, lightly touched upon
in brief words, I feel I have strayed by a subtle
digression, while con-

--- Page 32 ---
...while other matters, offered by the urgency of writing, take pre-
cedence over the congratulation I had conceived. To bring this let-
ter to a close – a letter not to be sent from these confines, had
my initial thoughts corresponded to the outcome into which I am
rashly carried by the dictate of occasion – know that nothing could
have happened more pleasing to me than to see the fresh sheets from
the press, with the added brief announcement of the work being com-
pleted. May God grant that he whom we now diligently praise for
another's work, may soon, attempting some work of his own, be ad-
vanced by fame with kindly auspices.
Farewell. August 8,
1648.

[Decorative floral ornament]

TABV-

[At bottom right, partially cut off catchword: unclear]

--- Page 33 ---
T A B L E
OF EXPERIMENTS.
FIRST CENTURY.

[Ornamental initial D] Of external and internal percolation,
8 experiments. Page 1
Of motion from pressure, 5 experiments. Page 6
Of the separation of liquid bodies
by weight, 3 experiments. Page 9
Of infusions as much in liquids as in air,
7 experiments. Page 11
Of the appetite for continuity in liquids, 1 experiment. Page 15
Of artificial fountains, 1 experiment. Page 16
Of the poisonous quality of human flesh, 1 experiment. Page 17
Of the conversion of air into water, 1 experiment. Page 18
Of the correction and alteration of the body's stature,
1 experiment. Page 20
Of the condensation of air, so that it can be weighed and
provide nourishment, 1 experiment. Page 21
Of the commixture of flame and air, 1 experiment. Page 23
Of the hidden nature of flame, 1 experiment. Page 25
Of flame in the middle and at the sides, 1 experiment. Page 27
Of the motion of gravity, 1 experiment. Page 28
Of the contraction of a bodily mass or bulk,
1 experiment. Page 29
How vineyards are made more fertile,
1 experiment. Ibid.
Of the various operation of purgative medicines,
9 experiments. Page 30
Of food and drink most nutritious, 15 experiments. Page 37
Of the medicinal thread, 1 experiment. Page 48
Of the cure by habit, 1 experiment. Page 50
Of the cure by excess, 1 experiment. Ibid.
Of the cure by sympathetic motion, 1 experiment. Page 51
Of the cure of diseases which are contrary to the body's
predisposition, 1 experiment. Page 52
** Of

--- Page 34 ---
T A B L E
Concerning preparation before and after purging, exper. 1. 53
How blood is stopped, exper. 1. 55
Concerning the change of foods and medicines, exper. 1. 55
Concerning diet, exper. 1. 56
Concerning the production of cold, exper. 7. ibid.
Concerning the conversion and transmutation of air into water, exper. 7. 60
Concerning the hardening of bodies, exper. 8. 64
Concerning the reduction of air into watery moisture, exper. 1. 70
Concerning the force of union, exper. 1. 71
Concerning the production of feathers and hairs of various colors, exper. 1. 72
Concerning the nourishment of living beings before they are brought forth into light, exper. 74
Concerning sympathy and antipathy for medical use, exper. 3. ibid.
Concerning the hidden processes of nature, exper. 1. 76
Concerning the efficacy of fire, exper. 1. 79
That annihilation does not exist, exper. 1. 82

C E N T U R Y II.
CONCERNING Music, exper. 14. Page 83
Concerning the nullity and entity of sounds, exper. 9. 92
Concerning the production, conservation, and expansion of sounds, exper. 14. 99
Concerning the magnitude, smallness, and extinction of sounds, exper. 25. 108
Concerning the clarity and lowness of sounds, exper. 3. 117
Concerning the communication of sounds, exper. 3. 119
Concerning the equality and inequality of sounds, exper. 9. 120
Concerning sharper and lower-pitched sounds, exper. 6. 124
Concerning

--- Page 35 ---
EXPERIMENTS.
Concerning the proportion of high and low sound, exper. 4. 126
Concerning internal and external sounds, exper. 4. 129
Concerning articulated sounds, exper. 9. 131

CENTURY III.

CONCERNING the motion of sounds in any line, ex-
per. 6. Page 135
Concerning the duration and evanescence of sounds, exper. 5.
138
Concerning the transit and interceptions of sounds, ex-
per. 5. 141
Concerning the medium of sounds, exper. 4. 143
How much the figures of bodies contribute to producing
sounds, exper. 3. 145
Concerning the mixture of sounds, exper. 5. 147
Concerning the improvement of sounds, exper. 7. 150
Concerning the imitation of sounds, exper. 6. 153
Concerning the reflection of sounds, exper. 13. 156
Concerning the agreement and disagreement between those things which by sight and hear-
ing are perceived, exper. 23. 163
Concerning the sympathy and antipathy of sounds, exper. 5.
171
Concerning the impediments and aids of hearing [text cut off]

--- Page 36 ---
T A B L E
On contagious diseases, exper. 1. 182
On the incorporation of powders & liquids, ex-
per. 1. 183
On bodily exercise, and its advantages & disad-
vantages, exper. 1. ibid.
On foods which induce satiety, exper. 1. 184

C E N T U R Y I V.
On the clarification of liquids, and its ac-
celeration, exper. 11. 186
On maturation and its acceleration, as
well as on the maturation of drinks & fruits, ex-
per. 15. 191
On the making of gold, exper. 1. 198
On the nature of gold, exper. 1. 202
On the production and acceleration of putrefac-
tion, exper. 12. 203
On the prohibition & anticipation of putrefaction,
exper. 11. 208
On luminous wood in the dark, exper. 1. 213
On the acceleration of childbirth, exper. 1. 215
On the acceleration of growth & stature, exper. 1.
216
On sulfur & Mercury, exper. 5. 218
On the Chameleon, exper. 1. 221
On subterranean fires, exper. 1. 223
On nitrous water, exper. 1. ibid.
On the freezing of air, exper. 1. 224
On the freezing of water into crystal, exper. 1. ib.
On the preservation of both color and odor in Rose
leaves, exper. 1. 225
On the continuation of flame, exper. 10. 226
On the infusions and burials of various
bodies under the earth, exper. 5. 233
On the affections of the human body from various
winds,

--- Page 37 ---
EXPERIMENTS.
tis, exper. 1. 235
On summer and winter diseases, exper. 1.
236
On pestilential seasons, exper. 1. ibid.
On epidemic diseases, exper. 1. 237
On the preservation of liquids in deep wells and
vaults, exper. 1. 238
On Hesitation, exper. 1. 239
On the pleasantness of smell, exper. 4. 240
On the goodness and selection of water, exper. 7. 241
On temperate heat under the equator, exper. 1.
244
On the dark color in Ethiopians, exper. 1. 245
On movement a very few moments from death, ex-
per. 1. 246

CENTURY V.

ON accelerated germination, exper. 12. 248
On the retardation of germination, exper. 9. 256
On the improvement of fruits in trees and
plants, exper. 55. 259
On the composition of fruits and flowers, exp. 3. 282
On the sympathy and antipathy of plants, ex-
per. 19. 284
How herbs and fruits are adapted for medical uses,
exper. 2. ibid.

CENTURY VI.

ON the remarkable nature of fruits and plants, ex-
per. 17. 298
On the degeneration of plants, and the transmut-
ation of one into another, exper. 14. 308
On the height and lowness of trees, and
how they are made dwarf by art, ex-
per. 5. 315
** 3 On

--- Page 38 ---
T A B L E
Of the rudiments and growths of plants, or superfetation, exper. 26. 317
Of the production of perfect plants, by seed, exper. 11. 327
Of foreign plants, exper. 3. 331
Of the seasons in which plants grow, exper. 6. 332
Of the duration of plants or trees, exper. 5. 336
Of the various forms of plants, exper. 3. 338
Of the principal differences of plants, exper. 4. 341
Of the method of composition and improvement of soils, exper. 6. 344

C E N T U R Y VII.

Of the affinities and differences of plants and inanimate bodies, exp. 6. 350
Of the affinity and difference of Plants, and living beings, and in what way they share a boundary, exper. 3. 353
Miscellaneous experiments on plants, exper. 67. 356
Of the healing of wounds, exper. 1. 391
Of the fat which is diffused through the flesh, exper. 1. ibid.
Of the accelerated maturation of drink, exper. 1. 392
Of hairiness and feathers, exper. 1. ibid.
Of the swiftness of motion in birds, exper. 1. 393
Of the clarity of the sea, and the blast of the South wind, exper. 1. 394
Of the difference of heat in fire and hot water, exper. 1. 394
Of the nature of heat from moisture, exp. 1. 395
Of yawning, exper. 1. 396
Of hiccuping, exper. 1. ibid.
Of

--- Page 39 ---
OF EXPERIMENTS.
On sneezing, exp. 1.                                          397
- On the weakness of teeth, exp. 1.                         ibid.
On the tongue, exp. 1.                                                   398
On taste, exp. 1.                                                    ibid.
- On certain prognostics of pestilential seasons,
exp. 1.                                                    399
On special simples in Medicine, exp. 1.
ibid.
On Venus, exp. 3.                                                  400
On insects or creatures born from putrefaction,
exp. 3.                                                                      403
On running, exp. 1.                                                     410
On the pleasures and annoyances of the senses, es-
pecially of hearing, exp. 1.                                             ibid.

CENTURY VIII.
ON medicinal veins of the earth, exp. 1.                              413
On Sponges, exp. 1.                                                414
On marine fish transferred into fresh water,
exp. 1.                                                                      414
On attraction from similarity of substance, ex-
p. 1.                                                                          415
. On certain drinks in Turkey, exp. 1.              416
On sweat, exp. 6.                                                   417
On the Glow-worm, exp. 1.                                               420
- On impressions from passions of the mind on the
body, exp. 10.                                                           ibid.
On drunkenness, exp. 4.                                                427
On advantage or harm from wine even moderately
consumed, exp. 1.                                                       430
On bindweeds, exp. 1.                                            431
On Cantharides flies, exp. 1.                           432
On weariness, exp. 2.                                             ibid.
On the exuviae of certain animals, exp. 1.             433
On the posture of the body, exp. 3.                                   434
                                  ** 4                                          On

--- Page 40 ---
T A B L E
On pestilential years, exper. 1. 435
On prognostics of a more intense winter, exp. 1. 436
On medicines that condense & revive spirits, exper. 1. 437
On the painting of bodies, exper. 1. 438
On the use of bathing & anointing, exper. 1. 439
On corrugated paper, exper. 1. 440
On cuttlefish ink, exper. 1. ibid.
On the increase in the weight of the earth, exper. 1. 441
On sleep, exper. 3. ibid.
On teeth & hard substances in the bodies
of living beings, exper. 11. 443
On the generation & gestation of living beings in
the womb, exper. 3. 448
On visible species, exper. 2. 451
On impulse & percussion, exper. 3. 453
On tickling, exper. 1. 454
On the scarcity of rain in Egypt, exper. 1. 455
On clarification, exper. 1. 456
On plants lacking leaves, exper. 1. 457
On the materials of glass, exper. 1. ibid.
On the prohibition of putrefaction, & long preservation
of cadavers, exper. 1. 458
On the abundance of saltpeter on certain shores, exper. 1.
461.
On bodies that float on water, exper. 1.
ibid.
On tinder that consumes little or nothing, exp. 1.
462.
On tinder of low price, exper. 1. 463
On the collection of wind for cooling, exper. 1.
ibid.
On the salubrity of air or the contrary, exper. 1. 464
On the increase of milk in milk-producing
animals, exper. 1. 465
On

--- Page 41 ---
EXPERIMENTS.
Of sand which may resemble the nature of glass, exper. 1.
  465
Of the germination of Coral, exper. 1. 466
Of the collection of manna, exper. 1. ibid.
Of the correction of wine, exper. 1. 467.
Of bitumen as a material for artificial fire, exper. 1.
  468.
Of plaster hardening like marble,
  exper. 1. ibid.
Of the cure of certain ulcers and wounds,
  exper. 1. 469
Of the healthiness and unhealthiness of the southern
  wind, exper. 1. 469
Of wounds inflicted by bronze and iron, exper. 1.
  470.
Of mortification from cold, exper. 1. 470
Of weight, exper. 1. 471
Of the floating of bodies, exper. 1. 472
Of the flight of an uneven body in the air, exper. 1.
  472.
Of water as a medium for sound, exper. 1. 474
Of the flight of spirits from unpleasant objects, exper. 1.
  ibid.
Of the super-reflection of Echo, exper. 1. 475
Of the power of imagination for the imitation of sense,
  exper. 1. 476
Of the conservation of bodies, exper. 1. ibid.
Of the germination and multiplication of metals,
  exper. 1. 477
Of the submersion of a baser metal in a more precious one,
  exper. 1. 478
Of the fixation of bodies, exper. 1. 479
Of the restlessness of natural things in themselves, and the
  desire for change, exper. 1. 480

                      * * 5               CEN-

--- Page 42 ---
T A B L E
C E N T U R Y IX.

Concerning perception in insensible bodies,
tending towards natural divination or subtle
experiments, exper. 30. 482
Concerning the causes of appetite in the stomach, exper. 1. 495
Concerning the sweet smell of the Iris, exper. 1. 496
Concerning fragrance, exper. 1. 497
Concerning the corporeal substance of odors, exper. 1. 498
Concerning foul and fragrant odors, exper. 1.
499
Concerning the causes of putrefaction, exper. 1. 502
Concerning imperfectly mixed bodies, exper. 1. 503
Concerning concoction and crudity, exper. 1. ibid.
Concerning alterations which could be called major,
exper. 1. 505
Concerning bodies born to liquefy or the opposite, ex-
per. 1. 506
Concerning fragile or tenacious bodies, ex-
per. 1. 508
Concerning two kinds of pneumatics in bodies, exper. 1. ibid.
Concerning the concretion and dissolution of bodies, ex-
per. 1. 509
Concerning hard and soft bodies, exper. 1. 510
Concerning ductile and tensile bodies, exper. 1.
511
Concerning various affections of matter and characteristics
of bodies, exper. 1. 512
Concerning induration by sympathy, exper. 1. 514
Concerning honey and sugar, exper. 1. ibid.
Concerning purer metal among baser ones, exper. 1. 516
Concerning cements and quarries, exper. 1. ibid.
Concerning the alteration of colors in hairs and feathers, ex-
per. 1. 517
Concerning

--- Page 43 ---
EXPERIMENTS.
Of the difference of animals as regards sex, exper. 1. 518
Of the comparative size of living things, exper. 1. 520
Of producing fruits without seeds, exper. 1. 521
Of the improvement of tobacco, exper. 1. ibid.
Of various heats producing the same effects, exper. 1. 523
Of swelling and expansion in boiling, exper. 1. ibid.
Of the sweetening of fruits, exper. 1. 524
Of edible meat and the opposite, exper. 1. 525
Of the Salamander, exper. 1. 527
Of the contrary operation of time in fruits and liquids, exper. 1. ibid.
Of wounds and contusions, exper. 1. 528
Of Orris root, exper. 1. 529
Of the compression of liquids, exper. 1. ibid.
Of the operation of water on adjacent air, exper. 1. 530
Of the nature of air, exper. 1. ibid.
Of eyes and sight, exper. 7. 531
Of the color of the sea, and of any water, exper. 1. 535
Of scaly fish, exper. 1. ibid.
Of the left and right side, exper. 1. 536
Of frictions, exper. 1. ibid.
Of spheres which distance shows as flat, exper. 1. 537
Of shadows, exper. 1. 538
Of the undulation of the sea and short waves in it, exper. 1. ib.
Of the sweetening of salt water, exper. 1. 539
Of the return of saltiness into wells dug on shores, exper. 1. ibid.
Of

--- Page 44 ---
TABVLA EXPERIMENTORVM.
Concerning attraction from similarity of substance, exper. 1. 540
Concerning attraction, exper. 1. ibid.
Concerning subterranean heat, exper. 1. 451
Concerning flight through the air, exper. 1. ibid.
Concerning the dyeing of purple, exper. 1. 452
Concerning malefice, exper. 1. ibid.
Concerning the ascent of water or powders, by means of
flame, exper. 1. 543
Concerning the influences of the Moon, exper. 8. 544
Concerning vinegar, exper. 1. 548
Concerning animals which sleep the whole winter,
exper. 1. 549
Concerning the generation of animals from coitus & putrefaction, exper. 1. ibid.

CENTURY X.
CONCERNING the transmission & influence of immaterial
virtues, & the power of imagination. About which
three experiments are cautionary; in total
exper. 11. 552
Concerning the emission of spirits under the form of vapor, or
exhalation under the form of odor, exper. 26. 561
Concerning the emissions of spiritual species, which
affect the senses, exper. 1. 572
Concerning the emission of immaterial virtue from the minds &
spirits of men, whether through affections, imaginations, or other impressions, exper. 21. 573
Concerning the secret power of sympathy & antipathy, exper. 39. 589
Concerning hidden properties, exper. 1. 608
Concerning the general sympathy of the human spirit, exper. 1.
609

SYLVA

--- Page 45 ---
[Decorative woodcut headpiece with a central mask and floral motifs]

SYLVA SYLVARUM,
Or,
A NATURAL HISTORY
OF FRANCIS BACON,
Baron of Verulam, Viscount
St. Alban, &c.

FIRST CENTURY.

Various Experiments concerning the percolation
and penetration of one body through another.

[Decorative initial E]IG a well, a little above
where the outermost sea wave
runs out, with a depth
that corresponds to the last decrease
of the ebbing sea; the surging sea
will fill this with fresh water suitable for drinking.
That is popular on the coasts of Mauretania.

--- Page 46 ---
2 FRANCIS BACON
popular experience, where it alone compensates for the lack of fresh water. Julius Caesar understood this well when he was besieged at Alexandria. For by digging wells on the shore, he frustrated the laborious efforts of the enemy, who had diverted seawater into Alexandria's spring; and then saved his army unharmed, when the hope of salvation seemed to have been cut off. Caesar, however, ignorant of the cause, thought that a spring of fresh water was inherent in the sea sands, but it is clear that it must be attributed to the seawater, which fills the well according to the measure and increase of its tide, and having entered beneath the sands, and been filtered, deposits its saltiness.
	2. I remember reading of an experiment in filtering salt water through earth, with ten vessels placed one upon another, yet it did not shed its saltiness so as to be suitable for drinking. The same Author relates from the account of others, that salt water drawn through twenty vessels became fresh. This experiment seems to contradict the other one about wells dug on the shore; yet he says that when repeated twenty times, it is not without effect. But it is worthy of note how miserable our imitations are found to be, as we commonly apply ourselves to experiments, unless they are guided by great judgment and a certain light of axioms. For, first
			A

--- Page 47 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 3
for, there is no small difference between
the passage of water through twenty small vessels, and
the distance, such as appears in rising and falling water.
Secondly, there is a great difference between sand and earth. For
all earth contains a certain kind of nitrous salt,
of which sand is generally devoid.
Moreover, earth does not filter water as exquisitely as sand.
But a third reason now remains, which is as
suspect to me as the other two. This is, however,
that in the experiment of the transmission of seawater into
wells, the water rises, and in the experiment of the
transmission of water through vessels, it descends.
Now it is established that the more saline parts of water
(if once thoroughly imbued with salt) penetrate to the bottom.
And therefore it is not surprising if the derivation
of water by descent does not render it fresh. Furthermore,
I doubt whether the impact of water driven from the sea
is more suitable for shaking out the saline parts
than when water flows by its own motion.
3. Percolation or transmission seems to be a
certain kind of separation, which not only separates
the coarse from the fine, and the dregs from other parts,
but also much more subtle natures; and it is varied
according to the bodies through which the transmission is carried out;
A 2 as if

--- Page 48 ---
4 FRANCIS BACON
just as if a liquid deposits fat through a woolen sack, if through sand, saltiness. They report concerning the separation of wine from water, transmitted through ivy wood, or a similar porous body, but it is not confirmed.

4. The gum of trees (which usually appears to us translucent and clear) is only a thin transmission or percolation of the tree's sap through the wood and bark; and likewise, diamonds endowed with angles, and carbuncles collected from rocks (which also shine more than gum) are subtle exudations of stone.

5. Aristotle gives an inept reason why the feathers of birds are of more vivid color than the hairs of animals; for no beast has green hairs representing the color of lapis lazuli and living flesh. The reason is, he says, that birds are more frequently in the sun's rays than beasts. But that is manifestly false: for cattle spend more time in the sun than birds, which generally live in forests or shade. The truest reason is that the excrementitious humor of living things, which equally constitutes feathers in birds and hairs in beasts, is transmitted in birds by a thinner and more delicate filtration than in beasts; for feathers pass through quills, but hairs through the skin.

6. Cla-

--- Page 49 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 5
6. Clarification of liquids by adhesion is like an internal percolation, and it occurs when some glutinous body, mixed into the liquids, is agitated along with them. This motion causes the coarser particles to adhere to the glutinous body; and in this way, the finer particles are separated from the coarser ones. Thus pharmacists clarify syrups with egg white, mixed and agitated in the liquids to be clarified, because the egg white collects all the dregs and coarser parts, and after the syrup is placed on the fire, the egg whites harden and are removed. In this way, Hippocratic wine becomes clear if it is mixed with milk and thoroughly agitated, and then passed through a woolen sack, which they call Hippocrates' sleeve. And what is glutinous in the milk draws the aromatic powder and the coarser parts of the liquids to itself.
7. The clarification of water is a practice conducive to health; besides the fact that crystalline and clear water delights the eyes; but it is done

--- Page 50 ---
6          FRANCISCI BACONI
           acquires equal pellucidity, when the thicker
           parts are separated from others. Thus also
           it has been found, that the sweat of a man
           of a warmer nature, and who delights in bodily
           exercise, and keeps it not unclean, and has a
           thin skin, emits a sweet odor; as is related
           of Alexander, as we commonly see, that gums
           contain sweet odors.

*Various Experiments concerning the motion*
*of a body from pressure.*

9. Take a glass filled with water, and
           move a moistened finger around the rim of the
           glass, pressing it rather firmly. The finger,
           moved around for a short space of time, will
           cause the water to ripple and leap up in fine
           sprays. This instance excellently demonstrates
           the force of compression in solid bodies. For
           whenever a solid body (such as wood, stone,
           metal, etc.) is pressed, an internal commotion
           of its parts arises to free itself from the
           compression; and this is the cause of all
           violent motion. And it is worthy of the greatest
           admiration, that this motion has never been
           observed, though it is most obvious among all
           motions, and the principal root of all mechanical
                                                               operations.

--- Page 51 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR: Centur. I. 7
root. This motion first operates in a circle, as if trying, seeking a way to free itself, and in its progress explores where an easier liberation might be found. This motion is manifest in liquids. For all liquids form circles, and cause them to collide with each other; but in solid bodies (which are not broken) it is so subtle that it escapes sight. Nevertheless, it reveals itself through various effects: as in this example which we have in hand. For the pressure, facilitated by the moistening of the finger (since it adheres so much more easily to the rim of the glass), after some time excites all the particles of the glass to action, so that they strike the water sharply; which striking generates a splashing of the waters.

10. If you strike or pierce a fragile solid body, such as glass or sugar, it is not only broken in the part where the force was most directly applied, but it is torn apart all around into segments and fragments. The motion from pressure, exploring all ways, breaks where it finds the body weakest.

11. Gunpowder, expanded into such a flame that it does not suffer compression, moves circularly (for flame consists of the nature of a liquid body) sometimes receding, sometimes bursting the engine, but generally expelling the ball with an explosion.

--- Page 52 ---
SYLV. SYLVARUM: Century I. 7
root. This motion first operates in a circle, as if trying, seeking a way to free itself, and in its progress, it explores if an easier liberation is given anywhere. This motion is manifest in liquids; for all liquids form circles and dash them against each other; but in solid bodies (which are not broken) it is so subtle that it escapes sight. Nevertheless, it reveals itself by various effects: as in this example which we have in hand. For pressure, facilitated by the moistening of the finger (since it adheres so much more easily to the edge of the glass), after some time, excites all particles of the glass to action, so that they strike the water sharply; which percussion generates a leaping of the waters.

10. If you strike or prick a solid fragile body, such as glass or sugar, it is not only broken in that part where the force was most immediately impressed, but it is shattered all around into segments and fragments. The motion from the pressure, exploring all paths, shatters where it finds the body weakest.

11. Gunpowder, expanded into such a flame that it does not suffer compression, moves circularly (for flame consists of the nature of a liquid body), sometimes receding, sometimes shattering the cannon, but generally exploding a glo-
A 4 be,

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;

--- Page 53 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I.

Various experiments concerning the separations of bodies by weight.

14. Take a glass with a capacious belly and a long neck. Fill the belly partly with water. Take also another glass, into which you pour red wine mixed with water. Invert the first, with its belly turned upwards, and stop up its neck with your finger. Then insert its opening into the other glass, and remove your finger. Kept in this state for some time, it will separate the wine from the water; the wine will ascend and cling to the top of the upper glass, the water will descend and settle at the bottom of the lower glass. The passage is visible to the eyes; for you will see the wine emerge upwards in a slender (so to speak) vein. Therefore, for convenience (since the experiment requires a little time), it is advisable to suspend the upper glass by a nail. For as soon as so much pure and unmixed water has been collected at the bottom of the lower glass that the opening of the upper one is immersed in it, the movement will cease.
15. If there is wine in the upper glass and water in the lower, you will be able to experience no movement at all. If there is pure water in the upper, and colored water in the lower, or vice versa, no movement will exist. But experience shows.
A 5

--- Page 54 ---
10          OF FRANCIS BACON
it is established, even if the mixture of wine and water in the
lower (vessel) consists of three parts water, one (part)
wine, no impediment to motion arises.
This separation of wine and water is recognized to
exist from weight. For an unequal weight of
bodies is required, otherwise the operation is
thwarted. And the heavier body should always
be in the upper glass. But note,
that the water is made suspended, and a great
weight of water in the belly of the glass is as if sup-
ported by a small column of water in the neck of the glass.
For this cause excites the motion; for even a longer
delay scarcely separates water and glass in one glass.
     16. This experiment can be trans-
ferred from a mixture of various liquids to
simple bodies, which consist of various and
similar parts. Therefore, use in the
experiment brine or salt and sweet water,
pouring the salty (which is heavier) into the
upper glass, and see if the sweet ascends. Try the same with
sugar and pure water, and observe whether the
water that ascends deposits its sweetness:
for which purpose it would be necessary to have a small
siphon in the belly of the upper glass.

                                             Expe-

--- Page 55 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Century I. 11

*Various experiments pertaining to accurate*
*infusion both in liquids*
*and in air.*

17. In bodies that are more subtle, easily dissipated, and contain spirits, when you prepare an infusion, observe the following. A short stay of the body in liquids extracts the spirit; a longer one spoils it, because it simultaneously draws out earthy parts and corrupts the more subtle ones. And therefore it is an error in physicians if they rely only on a longer stay as if it strengthens the virtue. But if you require a strong infusion in bodies which consist of more subtle spirits, let the rule be that a longer stay is not allowed, but that the infusion of the body is repeated often. Take violets, and infuse a proper handful of them in two pints of vinegar. Let them stand for three quarters of an hour, and then remove them, and renew the infusion seven times with a similar quantity of violets; it will make the vinegar so fragrant with the smell of flowers that, if after twelve months it is brought forth in a vinegar cruet, you will perceive the scent before it is offered to you. *Note, that it smells more perfectly of the flower's fragrance after a longer period than the first time.*
          A 6               18. These

--- Page 56 ---
12 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; OF FRANCIS BACON
18. This rule, which we have prescribed, is of excellent use for the preparations of medicines and other infusions. For example, borage leaves are strong with an excellent spirit for dispelling the vapors of melancholy, and thus cure madness; nevertheless, if the leaves remain infused too long, they only provide a crude substance, devoid of all virtue; therefore, I suppose that if borage is steeped for a short space of time in must or dregs of beer, while it ferments and before it is decanted, with new leaves being added repeatedly, I would make a most efficacious potion against melancholic passion. I also hold the same opinion concerning orange tree flowers.
19. Rhubarb clearly contains parts of contrary operation to each other, namely, purgative and astringent to the body. The former are easily separated, the latter adhere more firmly. So that if rhubarb is infused for an hour and thoroughly pounded, it will purge better and astringe the body less after purgation, than if it is steeped for 24 hours; as experience has taught. I also conceive that, by repeated infusion of rhubarb (as was said concerning violets), with only a short delay allowed each time, an equally strong purgative can be made, as by

--- Page 57 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 13
Scammony. And it would be no small aid in medicine to be able to make Rhubarb and milder medicines as effective as those which are not without harmfulness.

20. The most purgative part of purgative medicines resides in a more subtle spirit, as appears from the fact that they suffer no ebullition without great loss of potency. And therefore it would be of good use in medicine to be able to retain the purgative power and remove the harsh taste of the purgative. And it seems that this can be done by observing a series of infusions, frequently repeated for a short space of time. For it is probable that the horrid and harsh taste adheres to the coarser particles.

21. In general, operation by infusions is crude and blind, unless it is observed which parts (of the substance) are extracted more quickly, and which more slowly, so that with a time proportioned to each, you may remove what you desire, and leave the quality. To know this, one must proceed by a twofold path. The first is, that you try what a long or short delay effects, as already said; the other, that you observe in order infusions of one and the same body in various liquids succeeding one another. For example, take orange peels, or rosemary,

--- Page 58 ---
14      FRANCIS BACON'S
rosemary, or cinnamon, whatever you wish,
and let them be infused for half an hour in
water; then remove, and again infuse into other
water, and so a third time. Then
taste and consider the first, second, and
third water. You will find that they differ
not only in virtue and inefficacy, but
also in smell and and taste. For it might happen that
the first water obtains more smell, as being more
fragrant, the second more taste, as being
bitter and pungent, etc.
      22. Infusions into the air (if it be permitted to call smells thus) have the same differences
as infusions into water. For various smells
(which exist in flowers or another body)
emerge at various times, some sooner,
others later. Thus we have found that
violets, honeysuckle, strawberries, emit a
sweet smell, which first appears, but a little
later, a harsh one, plainly different from the former,
which happens not so much by maceration, as by the slower egress of the grosser spirits.
      23. Just as sometimes we desire to extract
the most subtle spirits, so at other times we desire to remove the same, as being
noxious. Burnt wine inflames less, and is praised in fevers, because the more subtle spirits have exhaled.
Opium loses something of its poisonous quality,
if it has evaporated mixed with spirit

--- Page 59 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 15
by the manner of wine, or by some similar process. Decocted Senna leaves reduce some flatulence, and generally, subtle and flatulent spirits are removed by burning or evaporation. Therefore, in infusions of substances that have vehement spirits, it will be preferable to reject the first infusion after a short time and use the subsequent one.

    *Experiment concerning the desire for continuity in liquids.*

    24. Bubbles have the form of a hemisphere, with air inside and a thin membrane of water outside. Nor is it unworthy of admiration that air, when enclosed by water, can swell up so suddenly, and then, having gathered itself into a peak, be contained by such a fragile covering as a bubble. As for the swift ascent of air enclosed by water, it is a motion of percussion from the water, which itself, descending, propels the air upwards, not a motion from lightness in the air. Democritus calls this a motion of impact. In this obvious experiment, the cause of the bubble closing itself on all sides is that an appetite resisting separation and discontinuation (which is strong in solid bodies) is also found in liquids, although weaker and more relaxed;

--- Page 60 ---
16        FRANCIS BACON'S
and weaker; as can be seen in this movement of a bubble.
This can also be observed in small glass-like bubbles made from
saliva, which boys make from reeds; and
in bubble castles, which they prepare by blowing
into water that has acquired some degree
of tenacity from soap. The same is evident
in drops of water, which, having obtained enough
to flow down, are drawn out into a thin thread
lest they separate; if that is lacking, they contract
into round drops; this shape most strongly
preventing the discontinuation of the body. The cause
of roundness in a bubble is the same both regarding
the membrane of water and regarding the internal
air. For air likewise flees separation,
and therefore rolls itself into a round shape.
The persistence and brief stay of the air in a small
space shows that air, by its own nature, has a slow or
no tendency to rise.

A solitary experiment regarding artificial
fountains.

25. The rejection of experiments, which
I occasionally employ, even if it is not apparent, is varied.
But if an experiment proves to have been used in practice,
I accept it, but I present it as of doubtful
credibility. An unknown man describes a method
of preparing an artificial fountain. Seek out
sloping ground, where conveniently a swift
flow—

--- Page 61 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I.      17
...course for rainwater. Arrange a channel
half-full of stones of suitable size to a depth
of three or four feet in the same ground. Let
one part be placed on the ascent, the other on
the descent. Fill the channel with ferns in
suitable abundance, spread sand on the surface.
You will see (he says) after several repeated
showers, the lower part of the channel gushing
forth like a spring. Nor is it surprising if this
happens while rainwater is in its course. But he
adds that it will last for a long time after the
rain has drained away; as if the water is
multiplied, aided by the air, by the coldness, by
the condensation of the earth, and by the
association of the previous water.

A solitary experiment concerning
  the poisonous quality of human
             flesh.

  26. The French (from whom the Neapolitan
disease received its name) relate that during
the Neapolitan siege there were wicked
merchants who sold the flesh of men recently
killed in Mauritania, preserved in vessels, in
place of tuna; and that the origin of this
disease is ascribed to such foul and grave
nourishment. Nor does it deviate from the
truth; for it is known that cannibals in the
                                         West

--- Page 62 ---
18 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OF FRANCIS BACON
to eat human flesh; and that India,
when it was first discovered, greatly
suffered from this disease. Also in our
time, poisons, which are most potent for the
West Indians, consist of a mixture of human blood, fat,
or flesh. Many witches and sorceresses also,
both among heathens and Christians, feed
on human flesh, for strengthening (as it seems)
the imagination with foul and acrid vapors.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*the conversion and transmutations*
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*of air into water.*

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;27. These seem the most likely true
reasons for changing vapors or air into
water. The first is cold, which condenses,
as is shown by the condensation of air in a calendar
glass, where to some extent it becomes more
like water. We also see in the generation
of springs, to which the ancients assigned their origin
(very probably) from the
conversion of air into water, facilitated by
the stillness which the air enjoys in these parts of the
earth, so that it cannot be dispersed, and by the
coldness of the rocks; for springs are generated
most abundantly in those places. The same is evident from the effe-

--- Page 63 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I.      19
[...by the effe]cts of cold in the middle (as they call it) region of the air, which produces dews and rains; and by the experiment of the change of water into ice with the help of snow, nitre, and salt (about which we will speak later), which can be transferred to this conversion of air into water. The second reason is compression, as in Alembics, in which vapor is repelled back into itself by the opposing sides of the Alembic; in the dew adhering to the lids of a boiling pot, in the dew, in in time of rain, on marble and panelled work. But these contribute little, unless a thicker air is present in the vapors, and which is already in the next degree to water. The third reason is (still to be explored and not yet sufficiently manifest) the mixture of humid vapors with air. Let an experiment be made whether a greater quantity of water comes forth from the return than there had been before. If this happens, the increase is from the conversion of air. Fill the bottom of the Alembic with water, the neck being stopped, but first having ascertained the weight of the water. Suspend a sponge in the middle of the alembic, and see how much water you can squeeze from it. Whatever more or less there may be should be compared with the water consumed. For it must be known, if any change can occur, it happens most easily where the pores are small; and this is the reason why a sponge is prescribed to be used.
C 2

--- Page 64 ---
FRANCIS BACON

The fourth probable reason is also,
although not yet discovered; and it is
when air enters the tiny pores of bodies.
Indeed (as we have already heard) every
thing is more prone to conversion with a small
quantity of itself. Tangible bodies do not
delight in the company of air, but try to subdue
it into a denser body. In whole bodies
this is prevented, because there is nothing
to succeed the condensed air. Therefore
it must happen in loose bodies, like sand and
dust; which, if kept stored, collect
moisture.

*A solitary experiment on how a good*
*bodily habitus and stature*
*may be produced.*

28. Some of the Ancients relate that puppies
or other animals, if, when tender, they are enclosed
in such a cage or box, so that they cannot fill the just
measure of their kind, but grow in breadth
or height, grow to the form of their place. If
we are not deceived by the report of the ancients,
and if it can happen that tender offspring
compressed in this manner and kept more tightly
do not die, a method has been found
which produces dwarfs of monstrous and exorbitant
figure. That is beyond controversy

--- Page 65 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 21
...that, beyond controversy, long-time observation has established, that by pressing, the formed parts of a tender fetus deviate considerably from their shape. Thus the foreheads of infants, handled by hands (which was noted by the ancients), produce macrocephali; which head shape was then prized. A moderate elevation of the bridge of the nose prevents the deformity of a flat nose. This observation, thoroughly examined, reveals the means by which men and women may become in many ways more graceful and comely than the infancy of their native conformation would allow. Thus the retraction of the calves upwards prevents them from falling, but rather makes them support themselves. Likewise, the retraction of the forehead upwards renders it spacious and not low. The common custom of wrapping infants in swaddling clothes makes them grow up more slender and with a better shape. For we see young women use tighter constriction of their bodies against stoutness.

*A solitary experiment concerning the con-*
*densation of air so that it can be weighed*
*and provide nourishment.*

29. Suspended onions spontaneously germinate, and also pennyroyal, and a certain herb called Or-pinagria by the Latins, with which houses in the fields are adorned, tied to a small plank or stick and to

--- Page 66 ---
22 FRANCIS BACON
and set up against a wall, does something similar. But we see this more clearly in the greater houseleek, which bears leaves for two or three years. But it is known that its root is wrapped in oiled linen, which is renewed every six months. Nor is this inconsistent with what the ancients relate about the stem of Lilies. The cause is a strong, dense, and succulent moisture in these parts, which does not easily evaporate, and therefore suffices for germination to its former abundance, even if no nourishment from the earth is added; which happens in late spring or early summer, at times suitable for germination. We also see tree trunks fallen to the ground sprouting for a time. But there is a noble experiment, and one which consequently hints at more things, if it is investigated whether these, while germinating, increase in weight; which should be inquired into by weighing them before they are suspended, and after they have put forth shoots. If they do not increase in weight, nothing else is concluded from this, than that something departs from some parts, which in germination accrues to others. But if they do increase in weight, then it is one of the great wonders of nature. For it shows that air can thus thicken, so that it can be converted into a dense body; since the cycle of all things that are above the earth ends in attenuation, and pneumatic things...

--- Page 67 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 23**
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century I. 23
rather makes things airy and rare, than
conversely and in reverse makes them
solid from airy things. It is simultaneously demonstrated that air possesses the
faculty of nourishing, with the consequence broadly extending. Note, this experiment is to be tried with a *Sempervivum* taken without an
oiled linen, lest the plant be thought to receive nourishment from the oil.

A solitary experiment concerning
the commingling of flame and air,
and its great force.

30. Flame and air are not easily mixed unless instantaneously, or in the vital spirits and living creatures. In gunpowder, its vehemence was ascribed to the rarefaction of the earthy substance in the flame. So far true, and then (indeed) another element emerges, whose form occupies a larger space, whence necessarily expansion follows, and, lest two bodies fill one place, the necessary expulsion of the ball, or the blowing up of tunnels. But these speculations have something crude and dull. For flame, if nothing else were present, nor if it prevailed in the greatest quantity, can be suffocated by another hard body, such as an iron ball or the barrel of a gun. So that flame by a hard body

--- Page 68 ---
24      OF FRANCIS BACON
is not sufficient for expelling the body, but a hard body extinguishes the flame, and does not allow it to ignite or disperse. But the cause of such violent motion is in saltpeter (which we also call niter), because, containing within itself a crude and flatulent spirit, it first expands with the heat of the fire (nor are we unaware that simple air, thinned by heat beyond its nature, will prepare a place for itself, dissolving and expelling obstacles with its blast); secondly, when the saltpeter has expanded, it propels the flame outwards with a blast, like an internal bellows. And therefore we observe that sulfur, pitch, camphor, Greek fire, and other flammable materials besides, although they burn with a vehement and scarcely extinguishable flame, yet do not excite such fiery blasts as gunpowder. On the contrary, we see that Mercury (a most crude and watery body), when heated and tightly enclosed, possesses the same power as gunpowder. As for living beings, it is most certain that their vital spirits are a substance composed of airy and fiery matter. And although air and flame do not easily mix by themselves, they do not refuse to be coupled in a fixed body, which is evident in two bodies (which are their nourishment): water and oil. For these also of their own accord
                                       not

--- Page 69 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 25
they do not easily combine, but in the bodies of plants and animals, they allow mixing. It is not surprising, therefore, if a small quantity of spirits in the ventricles of the brain and the ducts of the nerves can move a body of such great mass with such vehemence, as in wrestling, running, and with such agility, as in the trembling play of a tortoise. Such indeed is the power of air and flame when they are incorporated.

A solitary experiment regarding the hidden nature of flame.

31. Take a wax candle and place it in an iron or bronze tube. Afterwards, place it upright in a saucer full of heated spirit of wine. Then, with the candle and spirit of wine simultaneously set on fire, you will see the flame of the candle expand, and swell four or five times more than it usually did before; and it appears in a round, not pyramidal, shape. Moreover, you will observe the internal flame of the candle with its color preserved, nor will it take on any blueness towards the color of the external flame in the spirit of wine. This is an excellent instance, supplying two things worthy of note. First is, that a flame enveloped by a flame is not extinguished, but is a fixed and continuous body, like air or water. Therefore, the flame will continuously ascend with equal magnitude,
                                B

--- Page 70 ---
26          OF FRANCIS BACON
magnitude, unless it is extinguished by being repressed from the sides;
And the larger the flame at the base, the higher
it rises. The second is, that flame does not
mix with flame, as air with air,
or water with water, but only remains
contiguous, as usually happens in consistent
bodies. At the same time it appears that the pyramidal
figure (which is usually presented to the eyes)
is a mere accident, and that the external air,
by eroding the sides of the flame, compresses
it and thins it into that form;
for it would exist as round of its own accord;
and therefore smoke is an inverted pyramidal figure,
since air extinguishes the flame and receives
the smoke. Note further, that the flame of the
candle within the flame of the spirit of wine is disturbed,
and not only expands itself and
ascends upwards, but also fluctuates with a back
and forth motion; as if flame by its nature, if it were not
extinguished, would equally roll along with an erratic and manifold
motion, and seek upwards. From
all these things it appears, that bodies (for the most
part) are true fires and flames
according to the opinion of the Stoics; perhaps
thinner and rarer than flame is among
us. For those are spherical and circumscribed by
boundaries, they rotate, and they obtain the color
and brightness of flame; so that
durable flame in the celestial region constant-

--- Page 71 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 27
and is of a constant nature, and in its natural place; with us, it is foreign, momentary, and impure, just as Vulcan limps from his fall.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the differing force of the flame in*
*the Middle and at the Sides.*

32. Hold an arrow placed in a flame for the space of ten pulses. Then, having removed it, you will find the outer parts of the arrow towards the flame more scorched and blackened, and for the most part turned into charcoal; while that which was in the middle appears only to have been touched by fire. This instance leads to many observations concerning the elucidation of the flame's shape; and clearly demonstrates that the flame burns more intensely around the sides than in the middle, and what is of greater importance, that violent or fierce heat or fire does not exist, except where, being more compressed, it thins itself. And therefore the Peripatetics (although their opinion concerning the element or fire above the air has deservedly been refuted) acquit themselves very well here. For to those who object that if a fiery sphere were given, which would envelop the world in such a close embrace, it would be impossible for all things not to be exposed to be consumed by fire,
B 2

--- Page 72 ---
28          FRANCIS BACON
exposed to be consumed by fire, they respond that purely elemental fire in its natural place, not irritated, is only of moderate heat.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning the di-*
*minution of the natural motion of gravity*
*at a great distance and a certain*
*depth of the earth.*

33. It is a constant assertion of many,
confirmed by obvious experiment, that in the bottom
of a mine shaft a mass of crude metal can be moved
and rolled by the labor of two men, which,
if transferred to the surface of the earth, would require the combined strength of six
men at least, to be moved from its place.
It is a noble instance, and it is expedient that a more exact account be had
of this experiment. For it is very probable
that the motion of gravity operates slowly
both at a great distance from the earth and in
the interior of the earth. The former occurs because the appetite
for union of dense and compact bodies
with the earth is weaker at a distance.
The latter, because the body has in some measure
obtained its own nature, from being under
the earth at a certain depth. But
as for motion towards a certain point or place
(which is the opinion of the ancients), it is
utterly vain.

                                        Expe-

--- Page 73 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 29

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*the contraction of a mass or bulk of a*
*body from the mixture of liquid*
*bodies with solid ones.*

34. It is strange that, when the ancients admitted experiments on the faith of others, they were able to build things of great importance upon them. This is one of their most trustworthy observations: They boldly assert that a vessel filled with ashes receives the same quantity of water as if it were empty. But it is plainly false: for it does not absorb a fifth part of the water. I attribute this difference to the ashes being placed more loosely or more tightly; as we see that ashes by themselves and unmixed, if compressed, occupy less space; so also ashes with air are held in a looser space, with water, in a tighter one. I have not yet ascertained whether water itself, with ash or powder mixed in, contracts into a narrower space.

*A solitary experiment on how*
*vineyards may be made more fruitful.*

35. We learn from a trustworthy report that if a multitude of grapes is applied to the roots of a vine, it grows more maturely and more fruitfully. This could be explored by means of grains of another

                                    B 3                      kind.

--- Page 74 ---
30          OF FRANCIS BACON
another kind placed at the root of a plant of the same
species, such as fig grains, apple pips, etc. the
reason can be established, that the grains
draw forth from the earth sap suitable for nourishing the
tree, inasmuch as they would spontaneously become
trees, even if deprived of roots. But
these possess greater power, attracting
and consuming all nourishment drawn,
just as large fish devour smaller
ones.

     *Various experiments concerning*
          *purgative medicines.*

   36. The operation of purgative medicines
and their causes have hitherto been reckoned among
the secrets of nature; and therefore the profound
ignorance of men attributes them to an occult
property, a specific virtue, and a fourth quality,
and to similar hiding places of ignorance. The causes
of purgatives are various, all open
and clear, and thoroughly proven by
experience. The first is, whatever
cannot be concocted and digested by the heat of the
stomach, the stomach expels either by
vomiting, or casts down to the intestines, and
the expulsive motion of the stomach and intestines
provokes other parts of the body (such as the orifices
of veins and similar parts) to expulsion
by consent. For nothing in the human
                                                       human

--- Page 75 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 31
human body is a more familiar and more frequent motion than that by consent. A heaviness of the stomach is caused either by the quality or the quantity of the medicine. Quality is of a threefold difference: either it is extreme bitterness, as in Aloe, Colocynth, etc.; or nausea from a most unpleasant and acrid taste, as in Agaric, Black Hellebore, etc.; or a hidden and hostile malignancy to the human body, often not manifesting itself by taste, as in Scammony, Mechoacan, Antimony, etc. It must be observed that if any purgative medicine reveals none of these qualities, a just suspicion of poison is aroused. For it either effects it by corrosion, or by a latent malignancy, and a certain repugnance with nature; and therefore caution must be exercised both in preparing and taking medicines of this kind. Also, the quantity of what is taken excites purgation, as we see in a large quantity of freshly drawn milk, indeed, even in excessively consumed foods; for too eager ingestion of foods often turns into purgation, both through the upper and through the lower parts. Therefore, we generally observe the operation of purgatives to succeed after two or three hours from when the medicines were taken, because the stomach first attempts to digest them.
               B 4               Simi-

--- Page 76 ---
32 FRANCIS BACON
We experience something similar with a stomach too overloaded, or with milk excessively taken.

37. The second cause is a sharp and biting irritation of the orifices in the parts, especially in the mesenteric veins, as it is known that salt or something similar, pricking and biting, inserted into the anus, provokes that part to expulsion; mustard excites sneezing, and whatever is hostile to the eyes with sharpness, moves tears. Therefore, we see all purgatives to be effective by a certain kind of irritation, besides the biting sensation which flatulence causes. And if this irritation exists in the highest degree, it slightly prevails over corrosion from poisons; and this sometimes happens with Antimony, especially if it has been administered to those whose bodies are not filled with humors. For wherever humors abound, there they (the humors) look out for the parts.

38. The third cause is attraction; for I do not deny that there is a power in purgatives which is directed by itself towards attraction, as with attractive plasters in Surgery; as we see crushed sage and betony, sternutatory powder, and other powders or liquids (which Physicians call errhines) taken through the nostrils, draw out phlegm and humors from the head. So also in Apophlegmatisms

--- Page 77 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 33
tisms and gargles are used, which draw out catarrh through the mouth. And this, without a doubt, is the power by which some purgatives draw out this humor, and some another, according to common opinion; as Rhubarb draws out bile, Senna leaves melancholy, Agaric phlegm, etc. Nevertheless, some draw more, others less, indiscriminately. Note also, that besides the sympathy between purgatives and humor, there is another cause why certain medicines draw out a humor agreeable to them more than another. That is, because certain medicines act more quickly than others, and those which act quickly draw out only the thinner and more fluid humors, but those which draw slowly exert their power on the more tenacious and viscous humors. Therefore, caution must be used as to how rhubarb and similar substances should be used, not by themselves, nor without any admixtures, nor habitually. For it quickly carries away the thinner part of the humor, leaving behind a more stubborn mass of humors. Something similar can be said about absinthe, so greatly celebrated.

39. The fourth cause is flatulence; for excited flatulence causes expulsion. And indeed it is found that all purgatives contain within themselves a crude spirit
B 5 &

--- Page 78 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S

& gas, which is the principal cause of griping
in the stomach and abdomen. And therefore pur-
gatives lose (most at least when decocted)
their virtue, and for that reason they are administered
especially in infusion, broth, or powder.
    40. The fifth cause is compression, as
when water is squeezed out of a sponge. Thus we
see cold water cause a discharge from the con-
traction of the skin and external parts, and in
the same way cold causes catarrhs and defluxions
from the head, and certain astringent plasters
squeeze out purulent matter. This kind of
action is not found in many medicines. Myrobalans
are potent with this quality, and the rinds of peaches.
For this virtue requires astringency,
but one unpleasant to the body. For a pleasant
astringency constricts humors more than it
expels them; and therefore such an astringency
is found in things of a harsh taste.
    41. The sixth cause is lubrication and relax-
ation, as is evident in emollient medicines,
such as milk, honey, mallows, lettuce,
pellitory, and others. Thus also a hidden
virtue of relaxation is in cold. For the body's
heat constricts the parts and humors
of the body, which cold relaxes; as is
                                                               evident

--- Page 79 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 35
is in urine, blood, broths, and similar things. If these are cold, they are dissolved; and by this kind of relaxation, fear loosens the bowels, because with the internal heat retreating to the heart, the intestines and other parts are relaxed; in the same way that fear also excites trembling in speech. And purgatives of this nature are constituted from Mercurial medicines.
   42. The seventh cause is abstergence, which is clearly a cleansing, or an incision of very viscous and tenacious humors, and which renders them fluid, and is an incisive separation from the part; which nitric water proves, which easily cleanses linen clothes, and, by wiping away the dirt, renders them clean. This incision, however, must be constituted by an acrimony lacking astringency, which we have in salt and wormwood, oxymel, and other similar things.
   43. There are medicines which move the stools and not the urine, others the urine and not the stools. Those which purge through the stools are such that they do not at all, or only slightly, enter the mesenteric veins; or partly cannot be digested first by the stomach, and therefore move immediately to the intestines from below, or otherwise are later rejected by the mesenteric veins, and thus in the same way return to the intestines;
                                  B 6                      

--- Page 80 ---
36 FRANCIS BACON'S
they return; and most of this double kind are
purgatives. But those which move urine are
such, which can be easily digested by the stomach,
and be received by the Mesenteric veins, if
they reach up to the liver, which transmits
urine to the bladder like the serum
of blood. And these aperient and penetrating medicines strengthen the operation
of the spleen by transmitting downwards the serous
parts of the blood to the Kidneys. For medicines
moving urine do not operate
by rejection and indigestion
as purgatives.
  44. There are various medicines which in greater
quantity move stools, and in lesser urine,
and conversely which in greater quantity
move urine and in lesser stools. Of the first kind
is Rhubarb, and some others.
The reason is, because Rhubarb is a medicine
which the stomach in lesser quantity
digests and concocts (for it is not flatulent
nor nauseating) and thus it transmits
to the Mesenteric veins, and opening to the lower
parts it expels urine. But taken in greater quantity
the stomach does not digest, and
thus it passes to the intestines. Pepper by some
of the ancients has been noted to be of the second
kind, which in a small quantity stirs
flatulence in the stomach, and thus expels through
                                          stools,

--- Page 81 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 37
stools, but in greater quantity it disperses winds, and the same passes to the mesenteric veins, and thus to the liver and kidneys, where by heating and opening it transmits urine abundantly downwards.

Various experiments concerning food and drink, especially the most nutritious.

45. We have dealt with the evacuation of the body; now we pass to its repletion from restoratives in consumptions and emaciating diseases. In plants, one part surpasses another in nutritive power. Thus, grains and roots nourish more fully than leaves, so that the order of the Folianati was rejected by the Roman Pope, inasmuch as he considered foliage unsuitable for the nutrition of the human body. Whether the flesh of animals also differs in this way has not yet been duly explored; for example, whether livers and other internal organs nourish more than external parts. Among the Romans, I find that goose liver was a delicacy, to such an extent that they even had means by art to make it both more elegant and larger; but whether it nourishes more fully does not appear. It is known that marrow nourishes more abundantly with fat, and I believe that a decoction from crushed and properly strained bones and sinews is a very nourishing broth. Thus it is also observed that Scotch-
                                        ham

--- Page 82 ---
38      FRANCIS BACON'S
ham (this meat is succulent) of wonderful nour-
ishment; it consists however of the legs and sinews
of beef cooked for a long time; also gelatin,
which they use as a restorative, is
made from the bones of veal. The pulp
in a crab, which is cooked sprinkled with spices and butter,
is more suitable for nourishment
than the flesh of the crab itself. The yolk
nourishes more than the albumen. So that
the more interior parts of living things seem to nourish more
than the exterior flesh;
except for the brain, which consumes too much spirit,
for any nourishing power to remain
in it. These could be applied to
the nourishment of the old or the extremely emaciated,
which are in a state very close to chyle,
even before they are sent down into the stomach.
   46. Take two large capons, and
cook them over a slow fire for about the space of half an hour
or more, until the blood has been consumed.
To the decoction, add the rind of a sweet citron
or a good part of a citron,

--- Page 83 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 39
...of fresh beer and must. Let the opening be wide, and of sufficient size, and suitable for the vessel, into which a sieve with capons extended lengthwise is placed. Let them macerate in it for three days and nights, with the opening left open for the process. Then let it be closed, and so let it remain for a day and a half. Afterwards pour it into bottles, and on the third day after pouring, it is drinkable, and it will last for six weeks (experience has taught) and will be drunk lively and flowery and frothy, and it will not be musty. A draught is very beneficial to those wasting away, either by itself or mixed with other beer. It quenches thirst, and is not flatulent. Note, it can hardly happen that food and bread taken in broth or drink (as is customary) immediately reach the veins and extremities as finely and easily as that incorporated in this way, or almost turned into chyle.

47. An experiment could also be made of a similar broth and mixture with bulbs or potatoes, or burdock roots, or the pith of a tall thistle, which are very conducive to nourishment. A trial could also be made with other meats, such as pheasants, partridges, suckling pigs, venison, especially tender venison.

48. A pottage can be made from capons'

--- Page 84 ---
**FRANCIS BACON'S**
pulp of crushed and strained fruit, and (after it has been prepared) mixed with an equal (at least) quantity of almond butter, is a food excellently suited for the nourishment of the weak, and is preferred to the dish commonly called Blanckmange, or gelatin; so too the entrails of fowls well cooked with a similar mixture of almond butter. For dishes or entrails are by themselves less flavorful and effective, and thus less suitable for the nourishment of weak bodies; but almonds, which are inferior to meat in flavor, imbue them with excellent quality.

	49. Indian Maize (without doubt) consists of an excellent nutritive spirit; but it ought to be well boiled and also reduced to a cream, as barley cream is prepared. I make the same judgment about Rice, from which cream is made. For in Turkey and other regions to the East, much rice is eaten, which is usually boiled thoroughly on account of its hardness; and moreover because it too much constricts the body.

	50. Pistachios, if they are good and not rancid, mixed with almond milk, or reduced alone into milk, like almond milk, but surpassing it in freshness, is an excellent food; but best when somewhat crushed
				Zin-

--- Page 85 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I.      41
-ger should be added, because they are not free from slight flatulence.

     51. It is known that freshly drawn milk possesses great nourishing power; likewise a good remedy for treating emaciation. But, while the cow is being milked, two small bags should be placed in it, one with powdered Mint, the other with powdered red roses. For the milk, in some way, prevents coagulation in the stomach: Add sugar also for the same reason, partly also for the sake of flavor. But it should be taken in a moderate draught, lest it remain long in the stomach and coagulate. Place the cup in which you receive the milk into a larger cup with hot water, so that you may consume it warm. I judge cow's milk, prepared in this way, to be preferable to ass's milk, because (without doubt) the latter is not so easily transformed/digested, but rather acidulous. Mare's milk is more effective against acrimony of the urine, and ulceration of the bladder, and also for all soothing purposes. Woman's milk is also prescribed for other debilitated persons; but I do not consider it among good foods, as it is somewhat too close to the juice of the human body, except for infants, for whom it is natural.

     52. Freshly extracted oil of sweet almonds, with sugar and a little spice spread on toasted bread, nou-
                                                              tri-

--- Page 86 ---
**42 FRANCISCI BACON**

...nourishment is excellent; but so that the oil may be preserved in the stomach from rapid digestion, afterwards fresh beer must be drunk with a large draught, and lest it loosen the stomach too much, a little cinnamon powder must be mixed in.

53. Egg yolks have such close potential for nourishment that they do not need new preparation or mixture, if they are fried or sippable. One may also eat them raw, but fresh, with sweet Malmsey wine. You would do best to add certain rounded slices of Eryngo root, and a little ambergris. For in this way, besides that capacity for nourishment which is immediately present, such a drink will moreover strengthen, so that it may not expel urine so often; for excessive outpouring of urine always harms nourishment.

54. The crumbling of food, as in bread-cakes and crumbled dishes, with butter added, benefits the mastication of the teeth; and therefore (and do not doubt) it nourishes more, especially in old age, or for those whose teeth are less firm. Butter, however, is not so suitable for weak bodies, unless it is moistened with a little claret wine, citron peel, finely cut orange peel, sugar, and a very little cinnamon or nutmeg. As for minced dishes, likewise, it is crumbled, but in place of butter or fat

--- Page 87 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 43
it would be better to moisten them partly with cream, almonds, or pistachio milk, or barley cream, or Maize, with the addition of a little coriander and caraway seed, and a very small amount of saffron. A fuller discussion about foods we reserve for its proper place.

Up to this point we have discussed particulars which provide the best, most readily available, and most abundant nourishment; now we will treat of the best means by which they may be conveyed to the nourishing parts, and by which foods may be converted.

55. The first principle is to ensure that nourishment is not dissipated and consumed. In this regard, what was said before deserves the most appropriate observation for this intention, namely, that the kidneys do not too vehemently deposit a very large part of the blood through urine. Add also Aristotle's precept, that all wine should be prohibited in consumptions (wasting diseases), because the spirits of wine prey upon the dewy humor of the body, and mix themselves with the body's spirits, and thus deprive and frustrate them of their nourishment. Therefore, if for a consumption which the weakness of the stomach causes, the use of wine must be indulged, it should always be presented burnt (distilled/heated), so that the more volatile spirits may evaporate, or at least be extinguished by two small masses of gold repeated seven times.

--- Page 88 ---
44 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OF FRANCIS BACON
repeated. Moreover, let this caution be added, lest
too much dissipation of nourishment occur from exha-
lation and sweat. And therefore if the patient is prone to
sweating, let it be gently restrained. But one must
especially insist on Hippocrates'
precept, who advises the exact opposite of what
custom holds. Namely, that linens or
garments applied close to the body, in winter should be
dry and frequently changed, but in summer rarely
varied, and anointed with oil. For it is very true
that every fatty substance somewhat fills the
pores of the body and in a way inhibits sweat.
But a more refined custom is to wear linens
lightly anointed with oil of sweet almonds,
and by no means to prohibit changing them,
if ever it is necessary.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;56. The second method is to transmit nourishment
more powerfully to the parts to be nourished.
To this end, let effort be given to strengthening
the stomach. And because the stomach is chiefly
strengthened by wine and other warming agents,
which are harmful here, it will be advisable to resort
to external applications to the stomach;
among which it has been found by experience that fomentations of
roses, aromatics, mastic, wormwood,
mint do not conduce as much as a cake
of freshly baked bread, sprinkled with a little
Spanish or Alicante wine, which dries out—

--- Page 89 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 45
and after it has been somewhat dried by fire, let it be inserted into a clean pouch and applied to the stomach. For it is established that every flower obtains a strong virtue from astringency, so much so that it hardens a piece of bread or a flower placed upon it. Therefore, a bag filled with bran is highly beneficial; but because it dries too much, let it not remain applied for long.
57. The Third Reason is, as it were, a kind of offshoot of the preceding, that food may be better digested in sleep. For we see bears and other animals that sleep through winter become very fat. And it is true (as is commonly believed) that sleep nourishes most, for two reasons: partly because the spirits consume less food in sleep than while living beings are awake; partly also (which is especially relevant here) because it promotes the distribution of food into the parts (of the body). And therefore, in old people and weak bodies, and in whom bile does not abound, a short sleep after lunch promotes nutrition. For in such bodies, premature digestion, the only harm from afternoon sleep, is not to be feared. So also, sleep in the morning after something easily digestible has been taken, such as cow's milk, nourishing broth, or something similar,

--- Page 90 ---
46      OF FRANCIS BACON
which accelerates nutrition. But this
must be done with the body upright so that milk and broth
can descend so much more quickly to the
bottom of the stomach.
   58. The fourth reason is, if it is brought about that
these parts can strongly draw nourishment to themselves.
Aristotle's observation is excellent, that the main reason
why certain plants have a longer lifespan than animals
is this: that they sprout with annual branches and
leaves, while these (animals), after the course of adolescence
is completed, produce nothing new, except
nails and hair, excrements, not parts. And it is undoubted
that nourishment is drawn better by tender (young) parts
than by adult ones; and then (this is the mystery of the
observation) while new branches and leaves draw sap, in
passing they simultaneously nourish the body. To the eye,
that also demonstrates the pruning of hedges, trees,
and herbs, (which is) most useful for their duration.
Therefore, transfer this observation to the improvement
of nourishment in animals, whose noblest and principal
end is the prolongation of life, a certain restoration
of lost vigor, and the softening of parts. For it is
certain that living things have parts easily nourished
and repaired, and (parts) of a contrary nature; of which
those (the former) are to be refreshed and restored, as in pass-
                                          ing

--- Page 91 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 47
By this means, these may be refreshed, and as it were, imbibe nourishment. For we see that beasts driven into good pastures recover youthful flesh, and men emaciated by diet become fat, corpulent, and as it were, new. So much so that we seem able to safely conclude that in the frequent and prudent use of artificial emaciations and purgings, and perhaps some blood-letting, is chiefly achieved the prolongation of life and some restoration of youth. For as we have often said, death comes upon living creatures like the torment of Mezentius.

  *Moreover, he joined dead bodies to living ones,*
      *Fitting hands to hands, and mouths to mouths.*

Since the easily reparable parts in the human body (such as spirits, blood, flesh) perish within the complex of difficult-to-repair parts (such as bones, nerves, and membranes). Similarly, certain internal organs (to be numbered among the spermatic parts) are difficult to repair; although that division of spermatic and menstrual parts has no firm basis. This observation could be applied to the purpose (which we are considering here) of nourishing bodies after emaciation.
                                                                 Ideo-

--- Page 92 ---
48 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;FRANCIS BACON'S
Therefore gentle rubbing promotes nourishment by
making the parts somewhat hungry, and warming
them up so that they may better attract nourishment.
This rubbing should be done in the morning, and to be
conveniently performed, with the hand, or a piece of
purple wool, smeared with a little almond oil,
and with a moderate amount of black salt or saffron added.
Thus also we see well-groomed horses become fat and
have a sleek appearance.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;59. The fifth method is to promote the very act
of food assimilation, which is done by externally
applying certain emollients, which render the parts
more suitable for assimilation. To which end I have
composed a certain ointment of the most fragrant
odor, which I am accustomed to call Roman. See the
formula. Its use is during sleep; in the deepest sleep
the parts especially assimilate.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*A solitary experiment concerning*
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*the Medicinal thread.*

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;60. There are many medicines which by
themselves effect no cure, and perhaps are harmful;
but applied in a certain order, one after another, they
effect a great cure. I myself have learned by experience
a remedy against gout, which has rarely failed,
but has driven it away within 24 hours: the first is

--- Page 93 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 49

[Marginal fragments on the left edge:]
for
me
at-
an
at
o
g
i
i

a poultice to be applied, whose prescription see at the end of this work before the Index; then a bath or fomentation, whose prescription see; afterwards a plaster, see the prescription. The poultice loosens the pores and renders the humor suitable for exhalation. Fomentation draws forth humors in the manner of vapors, but with respect to the path made by the poultice, it extracts moderately and moreover draws nothing from elsewhere. For it is a gentle fomentation, and it has a mixture and appearance of stupefaction, though slight. The plaster is moderately astringent, which repels in such a way that no new humor may fall upon it. The poultice alone renders the part softer and more suitable for receiving the defluxion and the impression of humor. Fomentation alone, if it were less effective without the path made by the poultice, would extract little; if too strong, it would draw both to the part and from the part. The plaster alone would restrain the humor contained in the part, and thus would both exacerbate it and prevent the access of new humor. Therefore, they must be applied in order, as has been said. The poultice is to be applied for a space of two or three hours, the fomentation is to be applied very hot for a quarter of an hour or a little longer, and repeated seven or eight times, the plaster is to be applied continuously until the part is strengthened.
	C	Experi-

--- Page 94 ---
50      FRANCIS BACON'S

A Solitary Experiment concerning
cure by custom.

61. There is also a certain hidden method of treatment, not yet brought into use, derived from habituation to a thing harmful in itself. Poisons have been rendered familiar to some, as has been said. Those who commonly tend to people suffering from the plague are rarely infected by contagion. The toleration of torments from habit renders them lighter. The digestion of immoderate food or wine, when turned into a habit, prevents indigestion and drunkenness. In general, chronic diseases, such as coughs, consumptions, certain types of paralysis, lunacy, etc., are most dangerous in the beginning. And therefore it is for a prudent physician to consider whether the disease is incurable, and whether its exact cure is free from danger. If there is danger, let him resort to palliation, let him alleviate the symptoms, not being too much occupied with a perfect cure: but often this method (provided the patient only has patience) achieves more than opinion would have promised itself; as also if the patient's disposition can overcome the symptoms during a paroxysm, and turn patience into a natural habit.
62. Various chronic diseases (such as
quartan fevers) are very often gluttony and ex-
                                  cess

--- Page 95 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 51
refusal cures, such as excessive ingestion of food and drink,
frequent fasts out of order, immoderate
bodily movement, or weariness, and similar things. The reason is
that continuous diseases acquire an adventitious vehemence from
habituation, besides the material cause of humors, so that the
interruption of habituation leaves them to their primary cause
alone, which, if it is weak, will collapse. Moreover, such excesses
excite and irritate nature, which thus more vehemently rises up
against the disease.

*A solitary experiment regarding*
*cure from motion through sympathy.*

63. There is great sympathy in the human body from the motion
of various parts. We see in the play of boys, where they try whether
they can rub their chest with one hand and lightly tap their forehead
with the other, that they continuously sometimes rub and tap with
both hands. Nor is it obscure that spirits which ascend to the nostrils,
if they draw a foul odor, irritate the stomach to vomit. It is also
known that when the lungs are wasted, if no ejection occurs through
coughing, a flux of the bowels follows, and soon the person dies.
Also, pestilential diseases, if they cannot be overcome by sweats,
end in a flux of the bowels, which is usually lethal. Therefore
C 2 Medi-

--- Page 96 ---
52 FRANCIS BACON
ingenious physicians should consider how, from motions in which they are effective, they can excite those which they have in their power through consent; as suffocation of the womb is cured by the stench of feathers or similar things.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning the cure*
*of diseases which are contrary to the*
*predisposition of the body.*

64. Hippocrates' aphorism, namely 'in diseases less,' etc., contains a good and profound speculation. For it indicates that diseases contrary to the constitution of the body, age, sex, season of the year, and diet are more dangerous than those which are agreeable to these. Someone might, on the contrary, be of the opinion that where the symptom of the disease and the natural disposition, as it were, lend mutual aid, the disease will be more vehement; and there is no doubt about this, assuming a similar quantity of matter. But what the Aphorism asserts is that such diseases indicate a more abundant collection of matter, and thereby can turn natural inclinations to the contrary. Therefore, in such a state of diseases, the physician should aim more for purgation than alteration, since the fault lies in quantity, and the qualities spontaneously return to order.
65. Ex-

--- Page 97 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 53

A solitary experiment concerning pre-
paration before purgation, and the complete
restoration of the body.

65. It is a wise observation of physicians to
employ preparations before proper purgations;
for it is indeed true that the body is often greatly
harmed if both the things preceding purgation
and those following it are neglected. The harm
from a lack of preparation is the tenacity of
non-fluid humors, and their inconvenient exit;
which causes great disturbances in the body and
adverse accidents while the purgative is at work;
whence the strength of the medicine is dulled and
diminished, so that it does not purge sufficiently.
Therefore, the twofold office of preparation is
to render the humors mature and fluid, and the
ducts more pervious; for both facilitate the exit
of humors. As for the former (rendering humors
mature and fluid), syrups are most beneficial;
for the latter (making ducts more pervious),
decoctions or preparatory broths. Clysters also
ensure that medicines do not stick in the intestines,
and that they do not operate by tearing. But it
is true that bodies full of humors and fatty, and
a clear and serene atmospheric condition are in
themselves preparative, and render humors more
fluid. But let the physician attend to purgations
to be administered during frost,
            C 3

--- Page 98 ---
54          FRANCIS BACON
administered in frost, and to lean bodies, unprepared. For whatever harm exists after purging, arises from humors badly obstructed elsewhere; but it is indeed true that some humors fixed in certain parts of the body may rest without harm, while to other parts (especially the ducts) they bring much damage. Therefore, it will be advisable after purging to use decoctions and broths, not so much opening ones, as before purging, but to resort to cleansing and purifying clysters, so that the remnants of humors which could descend to the lower region of the body may be removed.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning how*
*blood is stopped.*

66. Blood is stopped in various ways. First, by astringent and repercussive medicines. Secondly, by drawing spirits and blood inwards; which is brought about by cold, as iron or a stone applied to the neck stops blood from the nostrils. It has also been found that testicles inserted into strong vinegar repel spirits and stop blood. Thirdly, by the regression of blood through Sympathy. For it has been discovered by experience that a part, sending forth blood, inserted into a recently dissected capon or egg, and which san-

--- Page 99 ---
      SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I.      55
still has blood, will repress the blood;
sucking out, as it seems, and, by similarity
of substance, reabsorbing the blood it
encounters, and thus receding. Fourthly,
by custom and the passage of time. Thus,
the wound first inflicted by a Spaniard
upon the Prince of Orange overcame the
medicines and bandages applied to stop
the blood. At last, the orifice of the wound
being stopped up by the thumbs of men
succeeding one another for the space of
at least two days, custom repressed the
blood. There is also a fifth method, that
blood be drawn in the opposite part by
revulsion.

*A solitary experiment concerning the mu-*
    *tation of foods and medi-*
            *cines.*

  67. The change of both medicine and food
is beneficial; nor should one persevere in
the frequent use of either. The reason is,
because that continuation produces satiety
in nature, so that its appetite and operation
are dulled. Thus we see noxious things
become innocuous by habit: such as poison,
for which some have a stomach capable of
handling it from continuous use. Wherefore
it is not surprising if some salutary things
lose their helpful power by habit. However,
the same intermission with change
               C 4

--- Page 100 ---
56        FRANCIS BACON
But the same principle of interruption combined with change holds true, in that things, when intermitted, afterwards emerge as new.

	*A Solitary Experiment concerning Diet.*

68. Experience dictates that diets strictly instituted from Guaiacum, Sarsaparilla, and similar substances afflict the patient more at the beginning than in the later stages. Hence, most of the more delicate patients stopped in the middle, deceived by the opinion that they would not be able to endure them until the end if the beginnings aroused such great disturbances. But the reason is that such diets dry out humors, catarrhs, and similar things, and they cannot dry them out unless they first attenuate them. And while the humor is attenuated, it becomes more fluid than before, and disturbs the body, until it has been dried out and consumed. Therefore, patients ought to wait a proper space of time, and not be put off by the initial effects.

	*Various Experiments concerning the Pro-*
		*duction of Cold.*

The production of cold is most worthy of inquiry, both on account of its use and the knowledge of its causes. For heat and cold are two hands by which nature principally operates. We have heat readily available, with respect to fire. Cold must be waited for until it ar-
					rives,

--- Page 101 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 57
it arrives, or must be sought in caverns, or on high
mountains; and when all things have been tried,
we cannot obtain it in the highest degree.
For furnaces heated by fire far surpass the heat of the Sun;
but vaulted places and hills do not greatly excel in the cold of winter frost.

69. The first cause of producing cold
is that which nature supplies to us, namely
a cold exhalation from the inner parts of the earth in
winter, when the Sun is unable to overcome it.
For the Earth (as has been well noted by some)
is primarily cold. Both ancient and modern
Philosophers assert this. Parmenides was of this opinion,
and the author of that discourse in Plutarch
(for I do not acknowledge Plutarch as its author)
concerning the primary cold. Telesius held the same view,
who revived the philosophy of Parmenides,
and among moderns is commended above all.

70. The second cause of cold is the con-
tact of a cold body. For cold is active,
and passes into adjacent bodies, like heat;
which is evident in those things which snow and cold
things touch. Therefore, whoever has devoted himself to the
scrutiny of nature, let him turn his eyes and mind to the conservatories of
snow and ice; such as are held in delight for cooling
C 5 in summer

--- Page 102 ---
58      OF FRANCIS BACON
in summer time, but that use is not so significant, and should be rejected in preference to others which such conservatories provide.
    71. The third cause is the primary nature of all tangible bodies. For it must be accurately noted that every tangible thing is cold by its nature, unless it has adventitious heat from fire, life, or motion; for even the spirits of wine, or chemical oils, whose power in operation is significant, are cold to the touch, and compressed and condensed air gathers some cold by the breath of the mouth.
    72. The fourth cause is the density of a body; for all dense bodies are colder than most others, such as metals, stones, glass, and they retain heat longer than softer ones. And it is most certain that earth, being dense and tangible, participates in the nature of cold. The reason is that since all material tangible things are cold, necessarily more compact matter imparts cold more intensely.
    73. The fifth cause of cold, or rather that which increases it and renders it more intense, are active and swifter spirits enclosed in a cold body; as various instances will prove to one carefully considering nature. Thus nitre (endowed with an active spirit) is cold, and colder to the tongue than a stone.

--- Page 103 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 59
stone. Water is colder than oil, because it possesses more mobile spirits. All oils, although they obtain tangible parts better digested than water, nevertheless have slower spirits. Snow is colder than water, because it consists of more spirits.
Thus also it is evident, that salt applied to ice (as in the artificial production of ice) increases the operation of cold. Thus certain insects having a living spirit, such as snakes, silkworms, appear cold to the touch. Thus Mercury is the coldest among metals, because it abounds in spirits.
74. The sixth cause of cold is the expulsion and flight of spirits which possess a degree of heat. For the expulsion of heat necessarily leaves a body cold. This is evident to sight in the operation of opium and stupefactives, if they are applied to the spirits of living beings. It would be worthwhile to try placing opium on the top of a thermometer glass, to see if it would contract the air; but I doubt the success. For besides the fact that the power of opium can scarcely penetrate the body of the glass, I believe that opium and similar substances expel spirits more by malignity than by coldness.
75. The seventh cause is the exhalation and extraction of hot spirits, an effect similar to that which arises from the flight of spirits.
C 6 Per-

--- Page 104 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S

It has become a widespread opinion that the Moon possesses a magnetic virtue for heat, just as the Sun does for cold and humidity. Therefore, an investigation using hot waters would be worthwhile: one exposed to the moon's rays, the other placed with a certain umbrella between the Moon's rays and the water, such as they are accustomed to use against the Sun for shade; to see which would cool sooner. Furthermore, it is necessary to explore a method of extracting the slight heat of the air; a secret of great importance, so that the sky may be rendered cold.

   *Various Experiments, concerning the con-*
      *version and transmutation of air*
               *into water.*

   In previous sections, we prescribed a method of turning air into water, in Experiment 27. But because it is a great work of nature, and points to great effects, and has various uses, we will give some instances which will shed light on this matter.
   76. It is recorded that sailors at night hang fleeces on the sides of ships, with the wool facing the water, and in the morning squeeze out fresh water for their use. And it is known to us by experiment that a quantity of wool loosely bound, and lowered into a deep well, and suspended about three cubits' distance from the water, overnight

--- Page 105 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 61**
the night in winter time increases in weight (as I well remember) to a fifth part.

77. Someone among the ancients relates that certain workers in Lydia near Pergamum, during a raging war, took refuge in caves, and their entrance having been blocked by enemies, they perished from hunger. But a long time later, bones were found, and vessels brought there with them, full of water, which water, thicker than ordinary water, almost resembled ice. A noteworthy instance of condensation and hardening by burial under the earth in caves for a long period of time, and also (as it seems to us) of the conversion of air into water, if some of these vessels had been empty. Therefore, examine a bubble suspended in snow, and a similar one in nitre, and of the same size in quicksilver, and if you find the bubbles to have deflated or contracted, be certain that the air has been condensed by the cold of these bodies, as could happen in a subterranean cave.

78. It is reported by trustworthy persons that in East India, a basin filled with water and placed without a lid where cloves are kept, will be found emptied within 24 hours, even at some distance from the cloves. Often among country folk, to defraud buyers, they place in fresh wool

--- Page 106 ---
62 FRANCIS BACON
freshly shorn wool, buckets filled with water so that the wool may increase in weight. But it is possible that the heat of the wool, left in it from the body of the sheep, or collected from its loose state, may attract watery moisture. But that has nothing to do with the conversion (of air into water).
     79. It is reliably reported that freshly shorn wool, accidentally placed on a vessel filled with verjuice, shortly after absorbed a large part of it, even if the vessel was not open with cracks and its opening was closed. In this instance, furthermore, the percolation or suction of the verjuice through the wood is to be noted. For the verjuice would not have passed through the wood spontaneously; but it seems that it must first have penetrated in some kind of vaporous form.
     80. Especially to be noted is the cause which promotes the conversion of air into water, since air is not dense, but subtly mixed with tangible bodies (as was partly said before), because tangible bodies have an antipathy with air, and if they have some denser liquid body in the vicinity, they will attract it, condense what is attracted more, and actually incorporate it. For we see a sponge, wool, sugar, or a woolen garment, placed with one part in wine or water, absorb the moisture higher up, and beyond that space to which the water or wine rises. It is also evident to the eye, that wood,
                                                            fides

--- Page 107 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 63**
the soundboard of a lute, and similar things swell in humid air, as shown by the splitting of the instruments, and the difficult turning of the pegs, and not unlike the opening of boxes and doors made of paneling; which is a kind of infusion, and is equivalent to infusion in water, and makes wood swell, as we see in cracks closing up by repletion, and fissures of spheres, if they are placed in water. But this part of the experiment, regarding attraction, is to be reserved for its own title on attraction.

81. The conversion of air into water is also observed in the exudation of marbles and other stones and of paneling, both before and already in humid weather. The cause seems to be either moisture which the body supplies, or humid air condensed within the hard body. But it is clear that we must refer to this latter [cause], since we see wood smeared with oily paint collect drops more quickly during a vaporous night than wood by itself; which happens from the smoothness and density, which admits no vapor, and condenses the repelled [vapor] into dew. Nor are we unaware that exhalation onto glass or a smooth body produces dew; and through the morning frost (which we call hoarfrost) we find drops of dew on the inner part of the window.

--- Page 108 ---
64          FRANCIS BACON
adhering to the part. Frost itself on the
ground is also merely a conversion or condensation,
by which the more humid vapors of the night turn into a watery
substance. Similarly, dew and rain
are simply the return of more humid
condensed vapors; dew only from
the sun's departure, whence a moderate cold; rain
from cold in the middle (as they call it) region of the air,
which is more intense.
     82. It is very probable (as we have
said) that whatever turns water into ice,
can also in some closer way turn
air into water. Therefore, apply that experiment
of the artificial conversion of water into
ice (of which we have made mention elsewhere)
to air instead of water, and ice around it.
And although a greater alteration occurs
in air converted into water than in water into
ice, there is still hope that it can be done by
continuous use of air. For that artificial
conversion of water into ice happens in a few hours;
this conversion of air, in the space of months or similar,
could be attempted.

  *Various experiments concerning the*
          *hardening of bodies.*

     The hardening and petrification of softer
substances is another degree of hardening,
a significant instance of alteration in nature.
                                        The effect

--- Page 109 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century I.      65
Its effect and its acceleration are worthy
of investigation. It is brought about by three
methods, however. Firstly, by cold, whose pro-
per function it is to condense and compact, as
has been said. Secondly, by heat, which does not
act properly or by itself, but by consequence.
For heat attenuates; by attenuating it
expels the spirits and the more humid parts of the body,
thence the thicker and tangible parts
contract themselves, lest a vacuum be created (as
they call it), and so they fortify themselves against
the vehemence of the fire which they have sustained.
Thirdly, by assimilation, when a hard body
assimilates a soft one contiguous to itself.
Examples of induration, taken indiscriminately,
are various, such as the generation of stones under the
earth, which previously were crude earth and clay.
And so concerning minerals; which first
(without doubt) arise from concreted juices,
which afterwards harden; and so
concerning porcelain vessels, which are artificial
cement dug up from under the earth. So also
the making of bricks and tiles, and
of glass from a certain sand, and artificial roots
and other material. So the exudations of diamonds
found in rocks, and crystals
which harden with the passage of time. So
the induration of amber, which at first exists as a
soft substance, as appears from flies and spi-
                                                                ders

--- Page 110 ---
66      FRANCISCI BACONI
found in it; and many other things. But these must be discussed distinctly.
   83. As for hardening by cold, there are few experiments of it. For no vehement and intense cold is given on this surface of the earth, so exposed to the sun's rays and the sky. The most suitable experiment will be given by snow and ice, which, when both are specially strengthened, and the cold is brought into action by the addition of niter and salt, will convert salt into ice, and that in a few hours. Perhaps in a longer time it might convert wood or hard clay into stone. Therefore, in a well, in which snow and ice are preserved, place a small piece of wood or tenacious clay, with a certain quantity of salt and niter added, and let it lie there for the space of a month or longer.
   84. Another experiment is made with the waters of metals which are endowed with potential cold. Place therefore wood or clay in the quenching water of iron, or another metallic water, and explore whether in a just space of time they harden. But I understand those metallic waters which are prepared by washing or quenching, and by no means strong waters which are made by corrosion. For they are more corrosive than that they should consolidate.
   85. Thus far it is established, that certain natural

--- Page 111 ---
[Marginal notes on the left, partially cut off]
ex fi[onte] (from a spring)
Nu[...]
frig[us] (cold)
exp[erimentum] (experiment)
die[...] (day)
gl[...] (ice)
spe[cies] (kind/appearance)
ad (to/for)
ov[um] (egg)

[Main text]
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 67
that there are springs which convert wood into stone, as will be possible to observe in a certain piece of wood, of which the part protruding out of the water will retain the nature of wood, while the other part will be converted into a kind of sandy stone. It is probable that these waters contain some metallic mixture, but a more exact inquiry into them should descend to particulars. It is most certain that an egg which had lain for many years at the bottom of a ditch, lightly covered by earth accidentally thrown over it, had equaled stone in hardness, and had preserved the distinct colors of the yolk and albumen, while its shell had shone like sugar or alabaster with its very fine grains.
      86. Another experiment is of hardening by cold, which has been discovered today; namely, that metals harden when repeatedly heated and quenched in cold. For cold operates most powerfully from preceding heat.
      87. Hardening that occurs by heat must be considered, which, due to the exhalation of humid parts, either hardens a body, as with bricks and tiles, or if it is more vehement, it liquefies the harder parts themselves, as in the common art of glass-making, and the vitrification of earth (which we see in the interior parts

--- Page 112 ---
68          FRANCIS BACON
(parts of furnaces) and in the vitrification of bricks and metals. In the former of these, which is hardening by baking without liquefaction, heat obtains these stages: first it hardens, second it renders fragile, finally it reduces to ashes and calcines.
      88. But if you wish to achieve hardening with a certain tenacity and less fragility, the method of the physician must be chosen; which Aristotle well noted, but did not approve, namely, that bodies be boiled in water for three or four days. However, it is necessary that the bodies be minimally permeable to penetrating water, such as stones and metals. For if such bodies are those into which water can insinuate itself, prolonged boiling will soften rather than harden, as has been proven in eggs, etc. Therefore, softer bodies must be placed in flasks, and the flasks suspended in boiling water with their openings outside the water, so that water cannot enter. For in this way, the potential heat of the water will enter, and indeed of such a kind that it will by no means render the bodies fragile or burnt, but the substance of the water will remain enclosed. This experiment was once performed by us with such a result. It was found that a fragment of cut stone and tin, placed in abundant water, had absorbed a little water. For softer and shavings/filings...

--- Page 113 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 69
had become more suitable for scraping than another particle of the same dry stone. But the tin, impervious to the entering water, had increased its whiteness and more closely resembled silver in color, though far less flexible. So also, into an earthenware flask, placed as above, were put a clay pellet of suitable size, a piece of cheese, a particle of chalk, and of cut stone. From these, the clay almost equaled the stone in hardness, and the cheese was also very hard and not easily cut; but the chalk and the cut stone were much harder than before. The color of the clay did not resemble the color of baked bricks, but rather approached the whiteness that sun exposure commonly produces. Note, that all the aforesaid experiments were conducted with a clear and sufficiently strong fire, and when the water was consumed, hot water was again poured in. The boiling, however, completed twelve hours; and it is probable that the experiment would have been more effective if the boiling had been continued for two or three days, as we said in the preceding sections.
      89. As for assimilation (for a certain degree of assimilation is found even in inanimate bodies), examples of the same are provided by stones in clayey soil, near the surface of the earth; where stones
                                                               are,

--- Page 114 ---
70      FRANCIS BACON
are, in which it is clearly seen that various
pebbles are gathered, and a crust of cement
or stone is interposed, of equal hardness
with the pebbles. And it would be worthwhile
to conduct an experiment: if, taking a
sufficiently large quantity of clay, various
pebbles were inserted, whether, with the
passage of time, another piece of the same
mass of clay which lacked pebbles would
become harder. We also see in the ruins
of ancient walls, especially at the base,
cement become as hard as brick. Wood
also collects a crust of tartar on the sides
of wine vessels, which surpasses the wood
in hardness. Thus also scales grow on teeth,
harder than the teeth themselves.
    90. Most of all, hardening from as-
similation appears in the bodies of trees
and animals. For no food by which trees
are nourished, and which animals also
receive, exists as hard as wood, bone, or
horn, etc., yet afterwards they are hardened
by assimilation.

    *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
        *the Conversion of Water into Air.*

    91. The eye of the intellect is similar
to the eye of sense. For just as large objects
can be seen through slits and pinholes in an
optical instrument; so also great axioms of
                                                                 nature from

--- Page 115 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I.      71
are clearly visible from humble and lowly instances. The sudden consumption of watery moisture by air, and its conversion into air, is not more conspicuous in any visible things than in the swift resolution and evanescence of a thin cloudlet of exhalation or vapor from glass, and the blade of a sword, and a body polished in that manner, which by no means retains or absorbs moisture; for the misty haze is suddenly dispersed and dissipated. But a similar cloudlet, applied to oily or greasy things, is not dissolved, not because it adheres more tenaciously, but because air consumes water, and flame and fire consume oil. Therefore, for removing spots from grease, they apply charcoal wrapped in blotting paper, because fire acts on fat or oil, as air acts on water. We also see that paper smeared with oil, or wood coated with oil, or something similar, preserves moisture for a very long time, but when moistened with water, dries out or rots more quickly. The cause is, that air mixes with difficulty with oily moisture.

   *Solitary Experiment concerning*
        *the force of union*

   92. It is worthy of admiration that the same slight instance of a very thin cloudlet on glasses, gems, or sword blades, demonstrates

--- Page 116 ---
Here is the translation of the provided Latin words, preserving the original formatting and incorporating the specified `ſ` (long s) corrections:

tenuiſſimis: most tenuous / thinnest (dative/ablative plural)
conſervationem: preservation (accusative singular)
præſentis: of the present (genitive singular)
reſiſtendum: (that which) must be resisted / to be resisted
obſervas: you observe
reſolutionem: resolution / dissolution (accusative singular)
iſtius: of that (genitive singular)
conſpicies: you will see / you will behold
diſſipari: to be dispersed / to be scattered
ſuccum: juice / sap (accusative singular)
infuſi: infused / poured in (genitive singular or nominative plural masculine)
pars: part (nominative/accusative plural)
imbibitur: it is imbibed / it is soaked up
cauſa: cause / reason (nominative singular)
reſpondeat: may it respond / let it respond
multos: many (accusative plural masculine)
fallat: may it deceive / let it deceive
majus: greater / larger (nominative/accusative singular neuter)
magis: more / rather
reſiſtit: he/she/it resists
valeat: may it be strong / may it be well / let it be effective

ſolitarium: solitary / lonely (nominative/accusative singular neuter)
ſpectans: looking at / regarding / observing (present active participle nominative singular)

fumus: smoke (nominative singular)
inſtantia: instance / urgency (nominative singular)
cauſa: cause / reason (nominative singular)

--- Page 117 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century I. 73

A history, but a more sublime kind of natural Magic, inasmuch as it not only describes nature, but transforms it into great and wonderful works. Therefore, perform an experiment, anointing doves or other birds when they are still covered only with down, or even puppies, trimming their hairs as much as possible, or other animals, with an ointment least harmful to the flesh, which may harden and firmly adhere, and see whether the colors of the feathers or hairs are changed. It is acknowledged that the plucking out of the first-sprouting feathers in birds entirely elicits new ones of a white color. It is also certain that white color results from scarcity and lack of moisture. Thus blue violets and other flowers, when they wither, become pale and white. Age and a scar make birds and horses gray, and the same cause produces gray hairs in man. Therefore it is very likely that the feathers which first emerge in birds are often of diverse color according to the nature of the birds, just as the skin is more porous; but where it is firmer, the feathers come forth white. This is an excellent experiment, not only so that birds and animals may be obtained with wonderfully varied colors, but also so that the nature of colors may become more deeply known, which of them are fi-

--- Page 118 ---
74 FRANCIS BACON'S
finer, and which a coarser porosity.
*A Solitary Experiment concerning the*
     *nourishment of living creatures before*
          *they are brought forth into the light.*
   94. It is a work of providence, most truly observed by some, that the yolk of an egg contributes little to the generation of the bird, but only to its nourishment. For if a newly hatched chick is dissected, you will find many remnants of the yolk; and it is necessary that birds, which are generated outside the womb of females, have in the egg both the material for nourishment and that from which the body is generated. For after the egg is hatched, and separated from the body of the hen, it receives no further nourishment from the hen, but only the vivifying warmth from her incubating. But beasts and man need no internal nourishment, because they are generated within the womb of the female, and are continuously nourished from her body.
*Various Experiments concerning Sympathy*
  *and Antipathy for Medical Use.*
   95. It is an old and accepted opinion that cantharides applied to any part of the body cause a blister and ulcerate it, if kept applied for too long. Also

--- Page 119 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 75**
and found that a stone brought here from East India
has a peculiar power of expelling stones from the kidneys,
and of dissolving them; so much so that, applied to the wrist,
it expelled stones downwards so vehemently that it had to be
removed because of the force.
96. It is an accepted belief, and proven by daily
experience, that the soles of the feet have a
sympathy with the head and the opening of the
stomach, as we see in those who are accustomed to shoes,
if they walk barefoot, both parts are affected. Powders
applied to the feet, if warm, first thin out, then dry up
catarrhs. Hence a certain physician, ostentatiously
peddling the mysteries of his art, in curing catarrh
prescribes continuous walking through a path sprinkled
with chamomile, hinting that chamomile should be put
into socks. So also, recently dissected pigeons, applied
to the soles of the feet, heal the head, and soporifics
applied to them induce sleep.
97. It seems that the head with the feet has sym-

--- Page 120 ---
**76 FRANCISCI BACONI**
Camphor, garlic, and similar things applied to the wrists of the hands, and renewed frequently, have cured chronic diseases. I also think that the washing of the palms in certain liquids is very beneficial; and those do well who, in burning fevers, hold alabaster eggs and crystal globes in their hand. We will speak more fully about these matters when we come to the section on sympathy and antipathy.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the hidden processes of nature.*

98. Human knowledge has hitherto been limited by speculation and sight, so that whatever the eye might perceive, whether because of the thinness of the body, or minute parts, or the subtlety of movement, has been little explored. These things, however, especially govern nature, and with these disregarded, a true analysis cannot be instituted, nor can the processes of nature be indicated. Spirits or pneumatic bodies, which are present in all tangible things, are scarcely known. Sometimes the name of void is given to them, although they are most active in the body. Sometimes they are taken for air, from which they differ wonderfully, as wine from water, [or] wood from earth. Sometimes they suppose them to be natural fire, or a portion of the elemental,

--- Page 121 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 77
...elemental, since some of them exist crude and cold. Sometimes they call them the virtues and qualities of tangible parts, which are known by sight, although they subsist by themselves; when it is a question of plants and animals, they call them souls. They indulge in such superficial speculations, as if a perspective drawing exhibited things in recession, when they are only depicted. Nor does this question rest merely within words, but it has a subject matter infinitely solidified in nature. For spirits are nothing other than natural bodies, proportionally rarefied, enclosed within the tangible parts of bodies as if by a covering. Nor do they differ less among themselves than dense and tangible parts, and they are present in all tangible bodies more or less, and for the most part never cease. From these and their motions principally proceed desiccation, liquefaction, concoction, maturation, putrefaction, vivification, and the principal effects of nature. For as we have described them in the wisdom of the ancients in the fable of Proserpina, in the infernal kingdom you will find few acts of Pluto, but many of Proserpina; since the tangible parts of the body are inert, and the spirits accomplish everything. Regarding the differences of tangible parts in bodies, the industry of chemists has contributed some light, while to separa-

--- Page 122 ---
78          OF FRANCIS BACON
by their separations they distinguish oily, crude, pu-
re, impure, thin, thick, and similar parts. Physicians acquiesce
in that knowledge, namely, that herbs and dregs consist of diverse
parts; as that opium has a stupefying part
and a heating part, of which the
former induces sleep, the latter draws forth
sweat. Rhubarb consists of purging and
astringent parts; but a fuller
inquiry has been conducted very negligently and
superficially. As for the more subtle
differences of minute parts, and their
position in bodies (which
produce great effects), not all are noted,
and the motions of minute parts in bodies,
which are so powerful, are not all
observed, because they are invisible, and do not
fall under the eyes, but must be apprehended by
experience. As Democritus well said,
when he was criticized for asserting that the world
consists of such tiny atoms as are seen in the sun;
"An atom," he said, "is proved to exist by the necessity
of reason and experience; for no one ever saw an atom."
Therefore, the commotion in the parts of solid
bodies, when they are compressed (whence all
the flight of bodies through the air, and the cause
of other mechanical motions, as partly said before, and dis-
                                                                cussed-

--- Page 123 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I.      79
will be treated in its proper place) is by no means visible to sight. However, ignorance of that matter and careless and superficial inquiry will prevent you from discerning, and much less from producing, the number of mechanical motions. Furthermore, as to the corporeal motions within the structure of bodies, whence effects (mentioned by us before) are brought about between spirits and tangible parts (such as desiccation, liquefaction, concoction, maturation), these have not yet been fully treated; but they exist expressed only by the names of faculties, natures, actions, and passions, and similar logical terms.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the Efficacy of Fire.*

99. It is certain that heat is the chief of all faculties, both in the fabric of nature and in the works of art. It is also clear that the effects of heat are most promoted when it exerts its force upon bodies without dissipation or detriment of matter, which confounds theories. And therefore it is true that efficacy can best be perceived in distillations, which are performed in closed vessels and receptacles. But there is nevertheless a certain higher degree: for although distillations preserve bodies in
D 4               and

--- Page 124 ---
80      OF FRANCIS BACON
and enclosures lest they be dispersed, yet they grant space
to bodies so that they may be changed into vapors,
and reciprocally they return into liquids,
and are separated from each other; as nature
is wont to expand, although full liberty
it may not enjoy, with the result that the true and ultimate
operations of heat are not obtained. But
if bodies can be altered by heat, and yet
such a reciprocation of rarefaction,
condensation, and separation they do not
admit, it is probable that this Proteus
of matter, as if seized by manacles,
will turn itself into various metamorphoses.
Take therefore a square iron vessel,
in the form of a cube, which has thick and
solid sides. In it place a cube, of
wood, which may fill it most tightly, and
let it have an iron lid equally strong
as the sides, and let it be sealed with clay in the manner
of Chemists. Then place the vessel on burning
coals; keep it well heated for a few
hours. I think, when inflammation
and evaporation are entirely prohibited,
the body continuously changing within itself, one of
these will follow: either the body of wood will be
converted into a certain kind of unguent
(as Chemists call it), or the finer
parts will be changed into air, and the coarser ones,
as if cooked and encrusted, will adhere to the sides of the vessel.

--- Page 125 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 81**
adhering, consisting of denser matter,
than the raw wood itself. Let another ex-
periment be made: take water and place it in a similar
vessel, sealed as before, but a more moderate
heat must be used, and the vessel must be removed
from the fire from time to time; and a short space
of time having elapsed, when it has cooled down, the heat
must be renewed; this alternation must be repea-
ted several times; and if you can ever bring it about
that water, one of the simplest
bodies, changes its smell or taste by heat,
as in compound bodies, be assured
that you have produced something great in na-
ture, and made a noteworthy entrance
to wonderful changes and productions of bodies,
and found a method by which fire can produce in a short
time what the Sun and age accomplish in a long
course of time. But concerning the wonderful ope-
rations of this closed distillation (for so
we call it), which is not dissi-
milar to the wombs and matrices of living crea-
tures, in which nothing exhales or is separa-
ted, we will treat more fully in its proper place. Not that
anyone should think we are af-
fecting Paracelsus's pygmies or prodigious trifles,
but that we may know the effects of heat to be such
that they scarcely enter human thoughts, if
all its force is retained enclosed.
        D 5                Expe-

--- Page 126 ---
82 FRANCIS BACON'S

A Solitary Experiment: Annihilation does not occur.

100. Nothing is more certain in nature than that it is
not possible for any body to be utterly reduced to
nothing: but just as it was the work of God's Omnipotence
to create something out of nothing, so too it is entirely
within omnipotence to destroy. And therefore it was
well said by a certain obscure writer among the
Chemists, that there is no other way of producing
wonderful transmutations of bodies than if in all ways
the reduction to nothing is urged and attempted.
Here is a great secret for preserving a body from
change. For if you can prevent them from turning
into air, because no air can enter, nor from passing
into adjacent bodies, since they are entirely heterogeneous,
nor from completing a circuit within themselves,
they will never change, even if by their nature they are
most perishable and mutable. For we see how flies
or spiders find a more lasting tomb in amber than
the preservation afforded to a royal corpse by balsam.
I feel the same about bodies placed in Mercury. But
then those must be thin, like leaves, and a particle
of paper or membrane. For if they are of greater
thickness, they will alter in their own body—

--- Page 127 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 83
altered, even if they are not consumed. But
more on these things in the section on the conservation
of bodies.

End of the First Century of Natural
History.

***

FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM
NATURAL
HISTORY

SECOND CENTURY.

Various Experiments concerning
Music.

[Decorative woodcut initial V] ariously, and not unsuccessfully, the practice
of Music has hitherto been cultivated; but theory,
especially that which contains the causes of practice, has been
treated very superficially. For it has been reduced
to certain mystical subtleties, of which neither the
use nor the truth is established. Therefore, according to our custom, we will
join the contemplative part with the active part.

101. All sounds are either Musical,
which we call tones, from which harmony
is composed; and these are always equal,
D 6                                  as

--- Page 128 ---
84	FRANCIS OF BACON
like singing, sounds both instrumental and
vocal, and those of bells, etc. or
non-musical, which are always unequal, like the voices
of speakers, all whispers, the voices of
beasts and birds (except those which sing), all
sounds from struck stones, woods,
membranes, skins (as in drums), and
countless others.

	102. Sounds which constitute tones are
generated by such bodies as consist of
equal parts and pores, so that the
sounds themselves are also equal. Such are produced
by the percussion of metals, as in bells, or
of glasses, when a rod is struck against them; of air, as in
the voices of singing humans, flutes, pipes,
organs, and musical instruments, etc.;
of water, as in flutes imitating the nightingale,
portable organs, or larger organs, and
other hydraulic instruments, in use among the ancients,
and held in high esteem by Nero, now
unknown through disuse. If anyone
thinks that strings, the plectrum, and the
instrument are by no means equal bodies,
and yet produce sounds, he errs. For sound
is not produced between the plectrum and the
string, but between the string and the air,
just as it is not usually produced between the finger
or a quill and the string in other instruments.
Only three percussions truly produce tones:
			metal-

--- Page 129 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 85
of metals (under which I include glass and similar
things), of air, and of water.

103. Diapason or octave in Music,
produces the sweetest harmony, so much so that
it is truly unison; which in a lute ap-
pears furnished with strings of a deeper sound, two
strings joined together, distant by an octave,
and producing only one sound. And any
octave note in ascent (as from the octave
to the fifteenth, from the fifteenth to the twenty-
second and so on to infinity) are merely scales
of the diapason. The cause is hidden, and by no
one ever given, deserves a more exact
investigation. Air, the subject of sound in
those [sounds] which we said are not tones, and thus all
unequal, as we said above, seems to admit great
variety, as the voices of animals, and similarly
of certain humans teach, from whose voices each
individual can be distinguished, and in the combinations
of letters it is to be observed, whence
articulated sounds, the most varied of all.
In sounds truly, which are called tones, and always
equal, air cannot be varied in so many ways, but
is forced to assume one and the same figure,
distinguished only by magnitude and thinness.
Thus also figures from oblique lines, straight
[lines], we can vary to infinity, if anywhere
it is given

--- Page 130 ---
86          FRANCIS BACON
wherever inequality is given. But circles, cubes,
and equilateral triangles (which are all figures
consisting of equal lines) can only differ
in terms of greater and lesser size.
     104. It is worthy of note (and the more so,
lest anyone ascribe a peculiar power to the number eight
by which the octave might be produced) that this
computation of the octave has been preferred to any other,
since a just computation ought always to admit
a division into equal parts. But now, in the ascent
of the octave (in tones), two flats or semitones
intervene; for if you divide equally into tones,
the octave consists of only seven whole and equal
notes; which, subdivided into semitones (as occurs
in [*a*] stopping the strings of a lute), make the number
thirteen.
     105. It is true, however, that ordinarily
in the ascent and descent of the human voice
(where we by no means measure tones by whole notes
or semitones, which is called equal measure)
two flats occur, as said, between the unison and the octave.
And this is a variation from nature. For if anyone
tries to continuously raise or lower their voice
through semitones, as when fingers press down the strings
on a lute, or

*a*] *Stops of a lute.*

--- Page 131 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 87
or through whole tones, until by ascending he reaches the octave, he will not be able to form sounds in this manner. From this it is evident that nature, after three whole tones, requires the interposition of a semitone for the sake of harmony.

106. It is worthy of observation, namely that whatever power is finally ascribed to the number for tempering the notes of a harmony, that power should rather be attributed to the preceding whole number than to the whole number itself; that is, because the sound recurs after six or twelve (notes), so that the seventh or thirteenth accomplishes nothing, but the sixth or twelfth (does); while the seventh and thirteenth are merely the limits and boundaries of the recurrence.

107. In musical harmonies, which are called perfect or semi-perfect, between the unison and the octaves, the fifth is the most perfect of all, then the third; the sixth is more harsh; and in the judgment of the ancients, as well as my own, and others, the fourth, which they call diatessaron. But the tenth, twelfth, or thirteenth, and so on to infinity, are merely recurrences of the preceding ones, namely the third, fifth, and sixth, being distinguished from each other by an octave.

108. In dissonances, the second and seventh are found to be the most unpleasing to the ears of all,

--- Page 132 ---
88          FRANCIS BACON'S
occurs, of which the former immediately precedes the unison, but the latter immediately follows the octave in descent; whence it appears that Harmony requires a just distance of notes.

   109. In musical compositions, if dissonance is not felt with the bass, an intervening dissonance with other parts generates no disturbance, provided that the dissonance of two (notes) is absent, which is most disagreeable. Therefore, the common harmony of four parts consists of an octave, a fifth, and a third with the bass. But that fifth, if you consider the upper voice, is a fourth, and the third, a sixth. The reason is, because the bass strikes more air; but the upper voice overcomes and suppresses (unless the dissonance is very harsh) and obscures a small error. For we see that some of the lower strings of a lute produce no upper sound, nor a mixed one; but only the sound of the bass.

   110. No harmony consists of quarter tones, because perhaps they admit no harmony. For we experience that semitones only sometimes recur. Nevertheless, there are tremulous [*a*] variations and certain gradations of voice and strings in a continuous series from one (note to another).

   *a]* *Slides, or Reliſhes, of the voice.*

--- Page 133 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 89
lowered or raised from one tone to another with the greatest pleasure.
   111. The causes of sound, whether pleasing or unpleasing to the ears, can be illustrated from those things which either delight or offend the sight. Two things are pleasing to the sight (setting aside the representations of forms, which are only secondary objects, and which only please or displease the memory): colors and order. The delight from colors symbolizes or has agreement with the pleasure which we perceive from one and a simple tone; but the delight from order symbolizes with harmony. Hence we see how much garden-knots in gardens and [a] frets of houses, and any figures rightly proportioned by equality please (such as spheres, pyramids, cones, cylinders), since in unequal things there is only deformity. Both these pleasures, pertaining to the ears as much as to the sight, arise from rightly observed proportion; so that it is certain that Harmony is produced from equality and symmetry. But the proportion of symmetry is difficult and obscure. We will nevertheless attempt something when we deal with tones, in the general inquiry into sounds.
   112. Tones are not so apt for inducing sleep as other sounds, such as wind, the murmur of water—

   a] garden-knots, and frets of houses.

--- Page 134 ---
90 FRANCISCI BACONI
noise, the buzzing of bees, and the pleasant voice of someone reading. The reason is, because being uniform, and not slipping past the ears, they affect and excite the sense more than others, and too much attention hinders sleep.
113. In Music, certain figures and tropes occur, very similar to those of Rhetoric; and which correspond to the affections of the mind and other senses. Firstly, division, and the vibration of the voice, of such delight in Music, agrees with the scintillation of light, like the rays of the Moon, while playing and wandering in the waves. Next, the transition from dissonance to consonance, a cause of the greatest sweetness, agrees with those affections which, after certain disturbances, are brought back into order. It is also akin to taste, for which the continuous use of sweetness creates satiety. A slip from a close or cadence exists not unlike the rhetorical figure which is called "beyond expectation"; for it is pleasing to be thus deceived. Repetitions and fugues agree with the rhetorical figure, repetition or traductio of words.

--- Page 135 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. I. 91
Music's modes cause a great alteration in character. Thus, for a man to be filled with a warlike spirit, to become soft, to be made effeminate, to be rendered serious, lively, and inclined to mercy, etc. The reason is that hearing, by striking, affects more immediately than the other senses, and more incorporeally than smell. For sight and touch have organs which do not afford such obvious and immediate access to the spirits as hearing does. As for smell (which certainly impresses its force immediately upon the spirits, and remains vehement while the object persists), that is a certain communication of breath or vapor from the object emitting the odor. But to harmony, an easy entrance is open, so that, approaching without any mixture and manifest motion, it frequently affects the spirits; and when these have been reduced to an equal order of position, there follows in them no small alteration and motion, even from an object remote at a distance. All these things show that there exists between tones and modulated melodies a certain affinity by their nature with the emotions. For some tones are cheerful, sad, [a] solemn, inclining the mind to mercy and to war; so that it is no wonder that the spirits are altered,
                                                               confi-

a] Solemne tunes.

--- Page 136 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S

considering the ability in tones to move them. It has been observed, however, that although varied tones variously dispose spirits and from these generate affections conformable to themselves, yet generally, Music nourishes and fosters the primary disposition of the spirits, that which existed before any alteration. It is also known that diverse tones, and songs derived from them, please different nations and people, as experiments show they have a sympathy with their spirits.

_Various experiments concerning tones;_
_and first, the nullity and entity_
_of sounds._

Perspective has been diligently treated up to now, and the nature of sounds has not lacked similar success concerning Music; however, when generally observed, it yields only perfunctory and superficial observations. It is reckoned among the most subtle secrets of nature. My intention is, as I previously mentioned, to add to the inquiry of things immersed in matter, either immaterial things or things participating less in matter; such as that

--- Page 137 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 93 .
Concerning noise. The sky is rotated very rapidly, yet no sound is perceived; although in the dreams of some, it is said to excite the sweetest music. Likewise, the movement of comets and fiery meteors (like a falling star, etc.) produce no sound. If anyone thinks great distance is the reason why sound does not penetrate all the way to us, let him consider that lightning and flashes generated in a space not very distant from us are seen without any sound at all, although they do not occur without percussion and a tearing apart of the air. Winds in the uppermost region of the air move clouds with a movement imperceptible here to us, and pass without sound. Winds blowing lower down on the plain, unless they are violent, produce no sound; these winds, however, are perceived among trees. In general, when winds produce sound, they always do so unevenly, with waxing and waning intensity; sometimes, when they are fiercer, they tremble at their greatest force.
Rain and hail falling even with great force do not make a sound by passing through the air, unless striking the ground, water, houses, or something similar. The rapid course of a river through its channel, if it is deeper, does not affect the hearing, but flows silently.
                                                               flowing-in

--- Page 138 ---
94 FRANCIS BACON'S
the slipping of water in shallow, sandy, or stony places, is heard.
Water dashed against the shore, or compressed in narrow places
(as in its flow under bridges), or dashed by winds, produces
a resounding sound. A beam or any solid body propelled by another
contiguous one without collision, lacks sound. So also, balanced
bodies placed mutually upon each other, even if the upper depresses
the lower, produce no sound. Thus, the movement of minute
particles in solid bodies (the principal cause of violent motion,
hitherto unobserved) is accomplished without sound. For that
sound sometimes noted is produced only by the breaking of the air,
not truly by the impulse of the particles. It is also clear that
wherever the front body yields, with the rear one succeeding,
no sound is rendered, even if the motion is very great and very swift.

     116. Open and expanded air produces no sound, unless sharply
struck, as in the tone of a string, where the air is struck by a
hard and rigid body, [a] and with swift contact; for a string,
unless struck more vehemently, will not produce sound.
But wherever air is enclosed and compressed, there a breath,
producing only a light percussion by exciting, suffices for sound;
as in pipes and pneumatic instruments.

     a] and vvith a ſharp looſe.

--- Page 139 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II.     95
matic instruments. But it must be observed in pipes, which
require only a moderate breath, that their
cavity, without the fipple
compressing the air (much more effectively
than a bare cavity), would produce no
sound. The other pneumatic instruments are blown more
forcefully, such as trumpets, cornets, hunting
horns, &c., which is shown by the inflated
cheeks of those who fill them with breath.
Organs also are inflated by a strong
wind from bellows.
Furthermore, observe again that some pneumatic
instruments are inflated through a small
hole at the side, which constricts the
breath at its first entry; and even more
so because there is a [d] transverse impediment
above the hole, which constitutes a stop,
as can be seen in pipes accustomed to be blown from the side
and other smaller ones of the same kind, which produce
no sound when blown from the end, like
flutes. Similarly, in every whistle,
the mouth is contracted, and to make it narrower,
a finger is used. But a stone or a javelin
thrown in the open air makes no sound at all.
The same applies to spheres, unless there is some
                                        concavity,

  d] in reſpect of their traverſe, and Stop above
the hole, vvich performeth the Fipples Part.

--- Page 140 ---
96      OF FRANCIS BACON
cavity, as they roll, compresses the air;
arrows also, unless they are feathered,
and thus constrict the air. Slender pipes,
or spider-thin reeds, produce sound because
of their extreme slenderness, by which it happens that
air is more compressed than in wider pipes.
Furthermore, the voices of humans and other
living beings pass through the throat, which
constricts the breath. As for [a] Jew's
harps, there is a sharp percussion of air, but in the mouth,
constricted.
    117. Solid bodies gently struck
are entirely without sound, as if someone
walks softly over planks laid on the pavement.
Chests also, or doors, in dry air,
when they are easily opened, produce no
sound; wheels moistened with water do not
creak.
    118. The flame of candles also, although its
movement is swift and splitting the air, is not
sonorous; nor is the air in furnaces,
although it expands as if boiling and is
driven back.
    119. A flame, when air is struck, produces a sound,
as in a fire stirred up by bellows,
and it is greater than if the bellows were to
act upon the air itself. Also, a violent
impression of the flame into the air (which, of course, suddenly
                                                                flam-

    a] Jew's Harp.

--- Page 141 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 97
seizing and expanding) produces sound; likewise, huge flames, of which some impel others, generate sonorous blasts.
120. It is rumored in popular discourse that a certain white powder is found for exploding weapons without sound. It is certainly a dangerous thing, if it be true, since it would be useful for secret murders. But it seems to me that it cannot happen that air, expelled and compressed, should rush into the open without sound. As for the white powder (provided a means of extinguishing and removing sound is found), it seems to consist of a certain mixture of saltpeter and sulfur without charcoal; for saltpeter catches fire by itself. If anyone thinks that sound can be abolished and extinguished by the air exploded while enclosed, before it reaches the mouth of the cannon and the open air, he conceives things that reason escapes, since they ought to produce sounds all the more distinct. Just as if a transverse tube were hollowed out in the barrel of a gun, it could emit various sounds, both through the front opening and from the sides. But my mind dictates to me, if such a thing could be brought about, that the air around the mouth of the cannon would not be compressed, and the ball would fly out with little or no sound.

--- Page 142 ---
98      FRANCIS BACON
to be expelled. For firstly, it is agreed that no sound is produced from the impression of the flame onto the ball, nor from the propulsion of the ball through the air, as we said. Secondly, if there is no enclosed air from which an impact into the open air might occur, the cause of sound is lacking; nor, nevertheless, will the ball cease from its forward motion; since that motion (which has been repeated several times) inheres in the parts of the ball, not of the air; which we are taught by experiment, if a small hollow metal object is taken, to be filled with gunpowder, and a ball is placed on its opening, with half of itself standing out into the open air.
     121. I remember someone asserting, boasting that the secrets of nature were intimately known to him, but most vainly puffed up, that a conspiracy had been detected by him, by which Queen Mary, Elizabeth's sister, was targeted, by means of a burning mirror from the leaden roof of a house, while she was walking in St. James's cemetery. So far, these things are undoubtedly true, if that efficacy can be reconciled to mirrors, which the burning of the fleet made famous among the ancients. The mere percussion of air from such mirrors will produce no sound; no differently than flashes of lightning and sheet lightning without thunder.
     122. I suppose that an impression of sound made into the air

--- Page 143 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 99
by this impression, a space of time is required for it to be conveyed to the sense; just as the impression of visible species, otherwise could not be perceived. And therefore, just as a moved globe can have such speed as to escape sight, so also a swiftness of motion exists which is not perceptible by hearing. For it is established that the perception of the eye is faster than that of hearing.

123. Every rupture of air, however minimal and slight, confers an entity to sound, which they call a crackle, a puff, a hawking sound, etc.; as in black salt, and laurel leaves thrown into the fire, also chestnuts leaping out of the ashes, in green wood placed upon the hearth, especially roots, in candles spitting flame if moisture is sprinkled on them, in scraping, sneezing, etc.; likewise a rose leaf shaped into a purse, if it is burst on the forehead or the back of the hand, as boys usually do.

*Various experiments concerning the production, conservation, and transmission of sounds, and in these, the service of air.*

124: What is commonly given as the cause of sounds, namely the elision of air (which also implies the cutting, division, and attenuation of
E 2                                        air

--- Page 144 ---
100        OF FRANCIS BACON
of air signifies) is a hiding place of ignorance,
and the mind forms for itself a concept of this motion,
such a concept the mind forms from few instances, as is the custom
of common philosophy; and it is inherent in all
that they easily admit things which, through a technical
term, present a clever expression,
even if empty of substance. This elision
is proven false by the sound of a bell, of strings,
and similar things continually fading a little
after being struck, which immediately die out
if the bell or strings are stopped by hand.
And this sudden extinction of motion could not happen,
if the elision of air were to produce it.
That is clearer, if the outer surface
of a bell is struck by a hammer. For the sound
will respond to the hollow within the bell,
while the elision and attenuation of air is only
produced between the hammer and the outer
surface of the bell. Furthermore, if
elision were the cause, a huge hammer and an awl
struck against metal s

--- Page 145 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 101**
they are created where no air is present. These and similar opinions will vanish like a mist, if the intellect is illuminated by the light of experience.

125. It is acknowledged that no motion is initially produced, unless a local motion of air or flame, or some such intervening medium, intervenes, and that with a certain resistance, whether in the air or in the body. For if there is mere yielding, no sound is produced, as we said before, and in that, sounds differ from light and colors, which pass through the air, or another body, without local motion of air, whether at the beginning or afterwards. But it must be accurately distinguished between the local motion of air (merely the vehicle of the cause) and the sounds themselves carried through the air. As for the former, it is clear that no sound is generated (not even from the impulse of air into air, as in organs, etc.) unless with a perceptible blast of air, and some resistance of the air struck; just as all speech (which is the gentlest motion of air) occurs by a slight expulsion of breath; and pipes produce both a blast and a sound. We also perceive that sounds are carried by the wind, which, being favorable, allows them to be heard at a longer distance than when adverse, and likewise they are raised and lowered with the intensity and remission of the wind.
E 3 But

--- Page 146 ---
102 OF FRANCIS BACON
But the impression of sound is entirely different,
which plainly lacks a perceptible local motion of air,
and in that respect is not unlike visible species.
For after the ringing [a] of something and the sound
of a bell, local motion in the air cannot be discerned
as long as the sound is heard, but only at the beginning.
Nor does the wind (however far it may carry the voice)
confuse any delicate, tender, and articulated figurations
of the air, in such a variety of words, with its own motion.
And if someone speaks with a loud voice against
a candle flame, it will not excite a great tremor in it;
but most of all, when letters are pronounced for which
the mouth is contracted, such as f and s, or certain others.
But a gentle breath and an inarticulate puff will
move the candle much more; which more easily proves
that sound occurs without any local motion of the air,
since just as it differs from sight in that sight requires
local motion of the air at the beginning; so sound in
many other respects agrees with sight and the radiation
of visible things, which undoubtedly impart no local
motion to the air, as already stated.
    126. Nevertheless, it is certain that glass
windows are shattered by the sound of thunder
or a cannon; and fish are said to be
                                                              per-

a] after a man hath lured.

--- Page 147 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Century II. 103
to be terrified by movement from such a sound, the sound having entered the water. But these are effects of local movement in the air, accompanying the sound (as we said), not produced by the sound.

127. The ancients recorded, and it gained belief among others, that very great applause and acclamations of people gathered in a dense crowd so rarefied and disrupted the air that birds flying overhead fell down, and the air was not able to sustain them. It was also believed by many that violent sounds of bells in populous cities repelled thunder, and by that means dispersed pestilential air; all of which a concussion, not sound, can effect.

128. A huge sound, carried from nearby, made many deaf, who at that very moment felt a membrane as if ruptured in their ears. To me also, while I was standing near something ringing loudly and sharply, sudden harm was inflicted, as if some rupture or dislocation had occurred in my ears; and a little later, a sonorous ringing arose (not a common singing or whistling, but much clearer and different) so that I feared deafness. But after a quarter of an hour it vanished. This effect can most truly be attributed to sound.

E 4

--- Page 148 ---
104      OF FRANCIS BACON
For as the commonly used
axiom dictates, a more powerful object destroys the sense;
and spiritual species, both visible
and audible, imprint their force in the sensory
organs, even if they move no body besides.
      129. A narrow receptacle preserves transmitted sounds,
and causes them to be heard further;
an experiment of which is in tubes of membrane and pipes. If
indeed the mouth is applied to one part, and the ear to the other,
the sound is perceived much further than
in open air. The cause is the dispersion and dissipation of sound through
open air, and its preservation and
constriction in such hollow spaces. If you also send a voice into a gunpowder
[a] container, or compartment,
and another applies an ear to the mouth of the cannon,
the sound passing through is perceived much more clearly than in open air.
      130. It must also be considered what would happen,
if enclosed

--- Page 149 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II.      105
and it has been found that in a body ten or eight feet long, sound is facilitated, even if the mouth and ear are removed by a hand's breadth from the body's extremities; and it is conveyed a little more conveniently if the listener applies himself closer than the mouth of the speaker. It is also established that a voice uttered from outside is better perceived in a room than outside the room itself.
  131. Just as a completely round receptacle preserves sound, so too does a semi-concave one, but to a lesser degree, that is, proportionally less. Therefore, if you split a body, or divide a reed into two parts, and one person speaks into this part, and another applies an ear to the other, the voice will be conveyed further than through open air. Something similar could be attempted in things not perfectly concave, even a ship's mast or an oblong pole, or a cannon (with the voice sent along its surface, not through its openings), and we would perceive the voice to be carried further than through open air.
  132. An experiment should be undertaken as to how and how much the voice conveyed would decrease in a horn along a curved line, or in a tube along a bent line, or in certain winding pipes.
  133. It is most certain (although accepted
               E 5

--- Page 150 ---
106        OF FRANCIS BACON
(although it goes against received opinion) that sounds can be generated without the aid of air, even if air is the most convenient vehicle for sound. Take a vessel filled with water, and strike tongs together at some point underwater; you will clearly perceive a sound, not greatly diminished, even though air is entirely absent.
    134. Take some silver vessel, and another of wood, both full of water; then strike the arms of the tongs, as before, a hand's breadth from the bottom; you will find the sound from the silver vessel clearer than from the wooden one. If, however, the vessel is empty, the collision produces no difference between the silver and wooden vessel. Hence, besides that observation of great importance, that no sound is produced from air, two things can be gathered from this: first, that sound is communicated to the bottom of the vessel, and second, that such communication passes better through water than through air.
    135. Strike certain solid bodies in the midst of a flame, and you will perceive a sound moderately differing from the sound in air.
    136. The spiritual part existing in all tangible bodies, and in a certain way akin to air, in some way performs the office of air [...]

--- Page 151 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 107
in which respect it acts. Thus, if an empty vessel is struck, sound is generated partly in the exterior air, partly from the interior air, which [sound] is greater or fainter, the fuller or more empty the vessel may be, yet with the participation of the spirit of the wood, which passes from the exterior to the interior surface. The same happens when bells are struck on their outermost surface, from which the sound also penetrates to the inner [surface]. Very many similar instances could be given, which we reserve for a treatise on the communication of sound.

      137. His ignorance would not be excusable, who would think (as we partly said before) that the sounds of strings are produced between the hand and the strings, or the plectrum and the strings, or the bow and the strings, since these are only vehicles of motion, by which sound is created; the sound otherwise truly arising between the string and the air, not however from the impulse of air made by the first motion of the string, but from the return or rebound of the string to its original place, after being tensed by the touch of a finger. That rebound motion is swift and sharp, while the former [motion] is soft and dull; thus the plectrum continuously strains the string, and for that reason makes it vibrate perpetually.

            E 6.            Expe-

--- Page 152 ---
108          OF FRANCIS BACON

Various experiments concerning the magni-
   tude and faintness of sounds, their ex-
        tinction or dulling.

   138. If someone blows a whistle into one end of a pipe, and an ear is applied to the other end, such a sharp impact of sound will be felt that it can scarcely be tolerated. The cause is the circular diffusion of sound, which, though otherwise dispersed through the air, if confined by a channel, will necessarily generate a greater sound. In this experiment, it is to be noted that by confining receptacles, sounds are not only preserved, but also increased and sharpened.
   139. A hunting horn, wider at one end, will intensify the sound more than if the opening were entirely uniform. The reason is that the air, having first entered narrower spaces, is compressed, then, having reached larger ones, it pours itself into a wider exit and expands itself. And in its exit, striking more air, consequently it becomes more powerful and deeper. Therefore, hunting horns, which are sometimes made straight and not curved, always open wider towards the lower parts. An experiment could be made with pipes wider below, or with some chamber, then tapering into a straight cavity.
                                             140. There is

--- Page 153 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 109
140. There is in the fields of St. James a channel
made of brick, to which a certain low covering
is adjoining, and at the end of which a round
house of stone. That channel has a window,
the house a fissure or a crack of moderate width.
A voice sent into this excites a terrible
roaring around the window.
The reason is the same as with the preceding, which dictates
that all hollow things with spaces that gradually widen,
in their recession produce a louder sound.
141. The bells of hawks, with openings open at the sides,
produce a greater tinkling than a small ball struck
against brass in the open air. The cause is the same
as with the prior instance of the syringe, namely that the sound,
enclosed by the walls of the bell, reaches the openings
whole and stronger.
142. Enclosures surrounding drums,
impeding the dispersion of sound, cause the egress
of sound from the drum's opening to be both more
vehement and clearer; than if a similar skin is struck
stretched in the open air; the reason coincides with the preceding.
143. Sounds are perceived more easily and from a greater
distance in the evening or at night than at midday or during the day;
the reason is that, the air being thinner during the day, sound
penetrates more, the same (air) being denser at night, it is contained.

--- Page 154 ---
110 FRANCIS BACON
is consumed less and dispersed. And so
night exists as a kind of enclosure. To
this also contributes the universal silence
of night.
     144. Sounds are reflected in two ways,
either at a distance, which is called Echo, where
the original voice and its reflection are distinctly
perceived, about which we will speak later;
or in concurrence, when the reflecting sound
(for the reflection arises from nearby) returns
immediately after the original, and therefore
is not repeated, but rendered ampler.
Hence Music is found to be more sonorous in waters,
and in rooms having panelled rather than draped
walls.
     145. The strings of a lute or a pandura, or
harpsichords produce a much greater sound
because of the rose-like opening, through
which the sound is emitted, and the lid,
and the hollow underneath, than if only the
surface of a board were given, with the opening
and hollow removed, so that the upper air might
be admitted to the lower. The reason is, the
communication of the upper air with the lower,
which by closing prevents the diminution or
dispersion of both.
     146. The Irish Lyre has air flowing
around it on both sides of the strings,
without a hollow along its length, but only in the
                                                               strings

--- Page 155 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 111
at the end of the strings; and it is more sonorous than a pandura, orpharion, or cithara, which also consist of [a] vvire-strings. I think I can assign the reason, that air, free and open on both sides, is beneficial, if a concave part is present; which therefore more suitably occupies the end.

147. Harpsichords, if the lid is not lifted, produce a weaker sound than if it were. The reason is that any enclosure of air, if deprived of sufficient flow, muffles the sound. Whence the previous instance is also confirmed. For the concave part of a lute or pandura somewhat restrains the air.

148. There is a temple in Gloucester (similar to which I have understood to exist in certain other places) in which, if you speak softly towards the wall, another person at a distance will perceive your voice more easily than one nearby. The structure of the place should be inquired into more exactly. I suppose there is an arch there, or some empty interstice, or [b] an Iſle behind the wall, and a certain passage at the further extremity of the wall, towards which you emit your voice; so that the voice of the speaker rolls along the wall, then enters some passage, and communicates with the air existing in the hollow space;

a] vvire-ſtrings.
b] Iſle.

--- Page 156 ---
112 FRANCIS BACON'S
subsisting; for it is preserved on account of the flatness of the wall. But this is by no means sufficient to produce a perceptible sound, unless it communicates with the air behind.
    149. When the string of a bow is struck, with the horns (of the bow) applied closer to the ear, it increases the sound and raises the pitch of the tone. The reason is, because the sensory organ is struck by the compression, before the air is dispersed. The same also happens if a horn is held by the teeth. But this is a manifest transmission of sound from the teeth to the organ of hearing, on account of the great communication between these two; which is evident even from this, that a harsh and rough tone dulls the teeth. The same happens if the horn of the bow is applied to the temples. But here it is only a slipping of sound from there to the ear.
    150. An iron or brass rod, with one part applied to the ear and the other struck, will produce a much greater sound than if a similar impulse were given to a rod not so contiguous to the ear. From these and certain other instances, partly already mentioned, it appears that sounds are not only conveyed along the surface of a smooth body, but are also communicated to the spirits residing in the pores of the body.
    151. I remember that in Trinity College, Cambridge, there was an upper chamber,
                                                               whose

--- Page 157 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 113
whose arch, weakened in the middle of the room,
was supported by an iron column of the thick-
ness of an arm, which, when struck, emitted a duller
sound, but in the room below it caused a great
noise.
152. The sound which buckets make in a well, when
dashed into the water, or struck against the sides
of the well, or colliding with each other, is deeper
and fuller than in the open air. The
reason is the compression and confinement of air in
the hollow of the well.
153. Vessels placed beneath the floorboards of a room
render any sounds in the room fuller
and more resonant.
So that in total five reasons are given
for amplifying sound: Simple enclosure or
compression, enclosure with expan-
sion, concurrent reflection, and access
to the sensory organ.
154. As for the faintness of voice or
any sounds, it is established that voice penetrates
solid and hard bodies, provided they are not
too thick, and water, a body sufficiently compact
and excluding air. However, voice and
sound are rendered weak and faint by that passage.
If therefore you stop up the holes of a hawk's
bell, it will emit no tinkling sound, but a
duller sound and a clang. A similar
thing happens in an Aëtites, which contains a small stone within itself.
155. Water

--- Page 158 ---
114          OF FRANCIS BACON
     155. Water supplies a most certain ex-
periment, if someone enters a bath, having
taken a bucket, the mouth of which, with
its bottom inverted, he brings down equally
depressed to the surface of the water, then
presses it down under the water to the width
of one and a half hands, maintaining con-
tinuous equilibrium, lest any part be lifted,
which would provide an exit for the air. Then
he, standing in the bath, should immerse
himself in the water to such a depth that
he can insert his head into the bucket, and
so much air, exciting bubbles, will burst
forth as his head itself requires for space.
Then he should utter a voice, clearly to be
perceived by another standing outside the
water, but with such a thinness as is custom-
ary for puppets, yet so that the sound, ar-
ticulating words, is not confused. It is to be
noted that this can be done much more
skillfully if the bucket is placed on the head
of a man not yet having entered the water,
who then sinks down, the bucket being de-
pressed along with him; and he should also
lean on his knees, or sit, so that he is more
deeply submerged in the water. Perhaps it
would not be in vain for someone to con-
jecture that the Sicilian poet had knowledge
of this experiment, when he narrates that
Hylas, the servant of Hercules, having gone
out to fill his bucket with water from a most
pleasant spring in the vicinity of the shore,
was snatched alive under the waters by
Nymphs, seized by love for him. Her-
                                                            cules

--- Page 159 ---
**115**
Hercules indeed called his lost servant with a clear voice so that the shore resounded, and Hylas responded from the waters, but (which is relevant here) with such a faint and thin voice that he thought him separated from him by a space of three miles, though the spring was in fact nearby.

**156.** In a lyre and other musical instruments, if the strings are pressed with fingers placed high [a] (whereby it happens that [b] less space is left for them to vibrate), a sharper sound is produced, but one that fades more quickly.

**157.** Take two cups, and strike the rim of one against the bottom of the other in a jar containing water, and by experiment it will be established that the deeper you immerse them in water, the duller the sound produced, even if part of the other remains out of the water. But the dullness is combined with an unevenness of sound, which arises from the fact that part of the cup is immersed in water and part protrudes. If the whole is submerged in water, it will produce a clearer sound, but lower and more muffled, as if carried from a distance.

**158.** Softness of a body, rather than solidity, extinguishes sound; as a bell wrapped in cloth or silk scatters more muffled
                                 sounds.

[a] you stop a String high.
[b] less Scope to tremble.

--- Page 160 ---
116  OF FRANCIS BACON
emits sounds, than if covered with a wooden
covering; hence in monasteries keys
are covered with cloth, and in colleges counters.
 159. An experiment on a pipe was attempted in various
ways by this method. The bottom of the palm of the hand
was applied, sealed everywhere with wax;
applied to a damask cushion; fixed
in sand, ash, water (to the depth of half an
inch under water); firmly placed on the bottom
of a silver basin; but the sound continuously re-
mained. However, placed on a woolen carpet,
silk, felt (although lightly);
inserted into snow, it completely extinguished the sound,
like a breath.
 160. The sound of hot iron is weaker
than that of cold; because while it glows, it appears softer,
and less resonant. So also the fall of hot
water is less sonorous than that of cold;
which (as it certainly seems to me) is softer,
and more akin to the nature of oil. For it
is more slippery, and this, because it cleans better.
 161. Let a pipe be prepared having a stopper
at each end, and its body should equal
two pipes in length, with holes on both sides
in equal proportion; let two (people) likewise play
the same tune on it in unison, and let it be
noted whether the sound is confused, or amplified, or dulled.

--- Page 161 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 117.
dulled. Similarly, let a cross be prepared consisting of a double body entirely hollowed out; let two persons speak or modulate, one along the length, the other across; let two persons listen from opposite sides, and observe whether the sound is confused, amplified, or obscured. These two instances will shed light when we discuss the mixture of sounds; about which later.
162. If bellows inserted into the mouth of a drum are inflated, and then the drum is struck, it renders the sound a little more obscure, without any manifest alteration. The cause is clear, because it both impedes the exit of the sound, and renders the air compressed by the blast unfit for motion.
*Various experiments concerning the clarity and lowness of sounds, and their transmission over a longer or shorter interval.*
163. The clarity and lowness of sounds differs from their magnitude and shrillness. [*a*] For the hypate, touched only lightly, produces a greater sound, [*b*] while the nete, struck hard, can be heard much further away. The reason is that the hypate impels more air, but the nete less, though with a sharper percussion.
164. Ve-

a] Base-string.
b] Treble-string.

--- Page 162 ---
.118          OF FRANCIS BACON
     164. Therefore, the vehemence of percussion generates clarity and fineness of sounds, as in a stronger and gentler percussion, in a more intense and more relaxed blowing of horns, in a stronger or gentler striking of a bell, etc. The vehemence or intensity of percussion depends more or less on the hardness of the body struck, or on the strength of the striking body. For a cloth struck sounds less, wood more, metal so much more strongly; and among metals, the sound of gold, as being more flexible, if struck, is duller, silver or bronze more ringing; but air, if strongly compressed anywhere, equals a hard body, which the sound excited by the explosion of a cannon proves. We also know by observation that an exploded pellet, or paper moistened and strongly compacted and expelled, or merely powder more vehemently compressed, are almost equal in the clarity of the sound produced.
     165. Sharpness and swiftness of motion contribute much both to clarity and to vehemence. Thus whips and rods, the more swiftly and sharply they strike the air, the clearer sound they produce. And in playing the lute, and a nimble stroke of harpsichords produces a most lively sound: the reason is that the percussion

--- Page 163 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century II. 119
...cussion, a swift one cuts the air more quickly, whereas a
gentle one rather pushes than cuts.

*Various experiments concerning the com-*
*munication of sounds.*

The communication of sounds (in the cavity
of a tortoise shell, an empty vessel, etc.) has only been touched
upon in the augmentation of sounds; but it claims a
peculiar title, and indeed by its own
merit.
166. A notable experiment, by which the
communication of sounds may be demonstrated, is
in the striking of a bell. Here, if you strike its uppermost
part with a hammer, then the middle, then the lowest,
you will perceive a sound sharper and deeper,
corresponding to the hollow interior,
although the percussion is only external.
167. Although sound is produced between the
breath of the mouth and the air contiguous to the pipe;
nevertheless it obtains some communication
with the sides of the pipe, and with the spirits contained
therein. For one sound arises from a wooden pipe, another
from a brass trumpet. A pipe also clothed
with cloth or silk will produce a different
sound from that which it would give by itself;
also moistened somewhat, it sounds differently
internally than when dry.
168. Sound produced under water more easily
com-

--- Page 164 ---
120      FRANCIS BACON'S
communicated to a hard body through water,
than when made in air to air. See
experiment 134.

*Various Experiments concerning the Equality*
*and Inequality of Sounds.*

   In the preceding (where we considered
Music), we dealt with musical sounds, from
which either harmony or dissonance of two
parts arises, which we call tones;
and likewise concerning non-musical sounds; the
reason for which was given by us, that the former are generated from equality,
the latter from inequality. We also
added what bodies were equal, producing tones, and what unequal,
lacking tones. Now indeed we will treat of that
kind of equality of sounds which
is not from the nature of bodies, but is accidental;
whether from the roughness or obliquity of
passages, or from repeated percussion, or from the trembling of motion.
   169. A bell gaping with a crack,
whence the passage for sound is more impeded, emits a harsh
and discordant sound; so also the human
voice, when the rough windpipe, seized by cold, suffers from hoarseness,
and, as if [a] furred, becomes hoarse;
and the sounds in these two instances
are unpleasant from mere inequality. But if
                                             une-

   a] furred.

--- Page 165 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Century II. 121
if inequality has its own equality, the sound becomes agreeable with a hiss or a screech.

  170. All instruments, whether [a] that have either Returns, like a trumpet; or by bending, like [b] Cornets; or are now raised, then lowered, like [c] Sackbuts, produce a trembling sound. But a flute, or a pipe, which lack such inequality, produce a clear sound. However, if a pipe or flute slightly moistened inside, produces a [d] wreathed string sound, deeper with a moderate tremor or hiss. Again, [e] more solemnly, a twisted string, such as is usually the lowest string of a pandura, excites a screeching sound.

  171. But a lute string, if it exists entirely unequal in its parts, produces a harsh sound, and which lacks tone, and is called dissonant. Hence [f] wire-strings are never found dissonant. We also see an examined lute string, which is called false, accustomed to be stretched firmly between the fingers, and struck by a plectrum, it redoubles itself, to be considered good, if indeed [g] it gives a treble, or more.
                    F              tam

  a] that haue either Returnes.
  b] Cornets.
  c] as Sackbuts.
  d] VVreathed ſtring.
  e] more ſolemnly.
  f] VVire-ſtrings.
  g] giueth a treble, or more.

--- Page 166 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S
or produces a sharper or greater sound, it is judged false.
  172. The sound of water carried by a swift current meets the ears tremulous; and in [a] portable organs (in which the nightingale's pipe, as they call it, contains water) a continuously tremulous sound is produced. Boys enjoy [b] playful siphons filled with water, which, when blown into, or when a whistle is excited in them, produce a tremulous sound. And this trembling has an affinity with the letter L. These inequalities of trembling are rather pleasing than offensive.
  173. All notes of a deep voice, and indeed of a high voice, produce a harsh sound, because the bass strikes more air than it could otherwise equally. And the treble cuts the air so sharply that it recedes too quickly for the sound to be equal. Therefore, the middle voice (Tenor) is considered the sweetest.
  174. Nothing occurs except the voice of a human or a bird, for which it is optional to produce a musical sound or not; the reason is entirely to be sought from the rough artery in the throat. This, when properly extended, acquires equality; just as a bladder contracted into wrinkles, if it is unfolded, becomes smooth.

  a] Regalls.
  b] Cockes.

--- Page 167 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 123
force escapes. That extension is required more in tones than in speech; so much so that an internal voice or whisper cannot produce a tone. In singing, too, the throat works more obviously than in speech, which the extension of the chin, or retraction in singers, shows.
175. The buzzing of bees is uneven, and some of the ancients state that this does not come from their mouth, but is an internal sound. But perhaps both err from the truth, since the movement of their wings excites this [sound], which we hear only while they are moving.
176. All metals, while they are quenched in water, emit a certain hiss, not unlike the letter Z. However, the sound is generated between the water or vapor and the air. Boiling also, in a moderate amount of water, produces a hissing sound; but ebullition in a full vessel produces a bubbling sound, such as in some way in the playful siphons [a] which boys use.
177. Let an experiment be made, whether the inequality or change of the medium does not produce an inequality of sound, as in three bells contiguous to each other, with air in between; of which the outermost is struck by a hammer, so that it may be clear
                                     F 2              how much

a] to the Cocks.

--- Page 168 ---
124      FRANCIS BACON'S
how much the sound differs from that of a simple
bell. Take also a bronze plate, and a wooden
plank, and of these joined together let one be struck,
and let it be observed whether an unequal sound arises
therefrom. Likewise divide wood in a barrel with its
openings and knots, and let the difference in sound be
noted in a barrel which lacks such divisions.

*Solitary Experiments concerning sharper and graver sounds, and Musical ones.*

178. It is evident that when a greater quantity of air
is struck, the sound is grave; when a lesser, acute.
The striking of a greater quantity is due to the
magnitude of the striking body, the width of the
hollow space which the sound passes through, and its
length. Hence hypate is graver than nete; flutes for
grave sounds have larger holes than those for acute
sounds. And these flutes and similar instruments
produce a graver sound, the further the holes are
removed downwards, and the further they are from the
opening; and the nearer to the opening, the more acute.
Moreover, a solid body, such as [a] an andiron struck
at the top will produce a more acute sound; in the
lower parts, a graver one.
179. It is also clear that the sound is more acute,

a] as an Andiron of Brass.

--- Page 169 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 125
sound, the sharper and faster the percussion of air is; and the graver, the slower it is. We observe the same in strings, which, the more taut and twisted (whence a faster vibration), the sharper the sound that arises. Thus, a thicker string more taut, and a thinner string less taut, produce the same sound.

180. Boys, women, and eunuchs emit thinner and sharper voices than men: the reason is, not because these (men) have a larger head, whence a stronger voice might emerge (for the effectiveness of voice or sound matters for differences in clarity or softness, but very little for differences in pitch), but a more dilated organ; heat also contributing to the dilation, as is certainly established. But the reason why the years of puberty change the voice, more escapes us. It seems that this happens because, with much of the body's fluid, by which parts were previously more fully irrigated, being driven to the seminal vessels, heat begins to abound in the body, which renders the passages more dilated; since all the effects of heat occur, such as hairiness, roughness of the skin, and hardness of the skin.

181. The ingenuity of musicians has devised two other methods for increasing the tension of strings, besides twisting. The first is the pressing down of strings with fingers, as on the neck of a lute, etc. The second is the shortness of the string, as in a lyre, clave-
F 3 cym-

--- Page 170 ---
126          OF FRANCIS BACON
cymbals, &c. the same cause of both effects,
namely, the production of a more rapid vibration
of the strings.
     182. The longer a string is extended, the
less high tension is required for a note.
For a proper tension of the string is required
before it produces any note. Also in the [a]
frets of a lute, &c. the higher they ascend,
the smaller is the distance between the [b] frets.
     183. Fill a glass cup, especially one
narrower below and wider above, with water,
and strike its rim with a stick; then, as the
water is poured out more and more at repeated
intervals, always test the tone with the stick,
you will perceive the sound to diminish, and
become graver the emptier the cup becomes.

     *Various Experiments concerning the pro-*
          *portion of sharp and grave sound.*

     184. The just and measured proportion of
struck air, regarding the gravity and sharpness
of sounds, is among the greatest secrets in
investigating the nature of tones. For it
explains their true coincidence in the octave,
which is the return of the same sound. Further-
more, consonance or dissonance...

--- Page 171 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 127
ter unison and diapason, about which we previously
briefly treated in experiments of Music.
It is indeed worthwhile to repeat here, as
a principal part of our inquiry,
regarding the nature of sounds. An investigation
could be made into the proportion of the tension of
strings, in the proportion of the distance in [a] frets,
and in the proportion of the cavity of pipes,
etc. but most conveniently in this last.
184. Let an experiment therefore be made: a
string once only tightened, so that it can produce a tone;
then repeated a second and third
time with tension, etc. let the scale,
or the difference of sound proportional to the ascent, be observed.
Two effects will simultaneously become apparent by this work;
first, the proportion of sounds equalized
to the measure of tension; second, the proportion of sounds
with fidelity from lesser or greater
tension. But this caution must be applied in estimating the measure,
that the length be taken in a straight
line of the string, in any tension
of the pegs.
185. As for the touches, the number of
frets must be entered; but especially
the length of the line from the first touch of the string,
to that which will produce the diapason, in relation to
the previous touch on the same string.
F 4 186. But

a] of Frets.

--- Page 172 ---
128        FRANCIS BACON
    186. But best (as mentioned) the matter will succeed in the holes of wind instruments. Take therefore six pipes, equal in length and other requisites; of which one has a single hole, another a double, and so on up to six holes. Observe what range of notes each of them produces. But diligently in these last three things it must be observed: what length of the string, what distance of the touch, and what ascent of sound the air in the cavity produces. As to the last of these (where the most suitable demonstration is offered), it should be noted by what increase of the cavity a progression of one note higher is made, by what (increase) for two, by what for three; and so on up to the octave, from which the greatest secret of numbers will be revealed. It is not far from the truth that makers of pipes, etc., are not lacking in knowledge of this matter, because they prepare them with certain [a] measurements. So also founders of bells in harmonizing their tones, so that the experiment can be confirmed by investigation. But it was observed by a certain one of the ancients that an empty vessel struck by a finger produces an octave in respect to the sound from a full vessel. But I do not conceive how this can be done, since the striking of a full or empty vessel scarcely produces any sound.
                                            187. Other-

    a] Sets.

--- Page 173 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 129
187 . Some perceptible difference to the
sense is required in the pro-
duction of a certain note, with respect to the
sound itself, which is passive; and that it not be
too near, but somewhat distant. For
in the flute, the three last holes produce a similar
tone, which note is lower than the tone
of the three preceding ones. Something similar is doubtless
required in the tension or touch of strings.

Various experiments concerning inner and outer sound.

Moreover, there is another difference of sound, which
we call inner and outer, which is neither
low nor clear; neither deep nor high-pitched;
neither musical nor unmu-
sical; although it is true that the in-
ner sound does not possess the power of
generating a tone; but on the contrary,
the outer sound may or may not be musical.
And therefore we will rather devote our effort
to enumeration than to exact distinction;
even if (to some extent to outline our
opinion) the inner sound is for us more truly
an impulse, or a bruising of air, than
an elision or cutting of the same; so that percussion
differs less with respect to the other, just as a blow
[differs] from a cut.
188. In human speech, a whisper, whether
clearer or softer, is called inner sound;
                                 F 5                                 the very

--- Page 174 ---
130 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OF FRANCIS BACON
the pronunciation itself is an exterior sound; and therefore
no tone or song ever arises from a whisper, as from speech.
Thus, respiration or breath, whether made by mouth, bellows, or winds,
however clear, is an interior sound; blowing
into a pipe or hollow object, however soft,
is exterior. By the same reasoning, very strong winds,
if they are not confined or do not blow through a hollow,
produce an interior sound; a whistle or
hollow wind emits a song or an exterior
sound; since the former is compressed by some body,
while the latter is constrained by its own density,
hence if the wind blows hollow, it is a sign of rain.
A flame, when it moves by itself or is fanned by bellows,
produces a murmur or an interior sound.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;189. Every hard body struck against another
hard body produces an exterior sound,
to a greater or lesser degree; so much so that
if the percussion is very soft, no sound arises from it,
but never an interior one.
As if someone walks with a gentle, imperceptible
step.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;190. When there is a percussion from the air, whether com-
pressed or not, against a hard body, it never
produces an exterior sound; as if you blow
very strongly with bellows turned towards a wall.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;191. Sounds, both exterior and inte-

--- Page 175 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 131
lower [sounds] can be generated both by exhaling and by inhaling breath, as in whistling or breathing.

Various experiments concerning articulated sounds.

192. It is evident, and also reckoned among the most admirable secrets of sounds, that sound, undiminished in any part of itself, is dispersed through the entire air, and adheres whole even to the smallest particles of air; so much so that the skillfully articulated diversity of sounds, both from humans and from birds, passes unconfused even through the narrowest crack.

193. Unequal agitation of winds, and similar things, even if, by carrying it to more or less distant places, they provide a vehicle for sound, nevertheless disturb the distinctions of sounds very little within that space where they can be perceived; although perhaps they are the cause why they are heard less far than in a calm sky; as partly said before.

194. Excessive distance confuses articulated sounds, as is evident from the fact that, perceiving the voice of a preacher or similar, you cannot distinguish the speech, and one articulated sound is confused with another, as happens when many speak at once.

195. In that experiment, if someone under
F 6                                  water

--- Page 176 ---
132      FRANCIS BACON'S
water emits a voice, a faint voice is rendered; but so that articulated sounds of words may be distinguished, as we said before.
   196. Thus I conclude that a sound extremely faint, or extremely deep, cannot be articulated; but the articulation of words requires a moderate sound; because both excessive thinness of sound confuses articulation by contraction, and excessive intensity by dispersion. And although (as said in the preceding sections) articulated sound can entirely be contracted after production in the passage through a narrow fissure, nevertheless, prior articulation requires a greater dimension.
   197. Observation has taught that a preacher in a place or chapel vaulted above and below cannot be heard as conveniently as in other places. The reason is, because subsequent sounds arrive before preceding sounds vanish; and therefore articulated sounds are more confused, even if the quantity of sound is greater.
   198. The movements of the tongue, lips, throat, palate, etc., which serve for the varied pronunciation of the letters of the alphabet, are worthy of inquiry, and pertain to the present investigation of sounds. But since they are subtle and require a long description, we deem them to be omitted, and
                                       among

--- Page 177 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Centur. II. 133
among the experiments of speech to be recounted.
The Hebrews showed diligence, designating which letters were labial, dental, guttural, etc. But the Latins and Greeks applied a distinction between semivowels and mutes, and among the mutes they made others slender, middle, and aspirated; nor in vain, but not precisely enough. For the special movements and impulses, from which the formation of these sounds arises, were investigated too little diligently; as for instance, that the letters B, P, F, M cannot be expressed except by contraction of the mouth or by closing the mouth; that the letters N and B cannot be pronounced without the letter N being changed into M, as Hecatonba becomes Hecatomba; that M and T cannot be uttered unless P intervenes, as emtus is pronounced emptus, and many similar cases. So much so that by applying themselves more deeply to this investigation, they will discover that fewer movements are required for the formation of the entire alphabet than there are letters.
   199. The lungs, of all parts of the body, are most spongy, and therefore are most suitable for contraction and dilation. When contracted, they expel air, which, passing through the trachea, throat, and mouth, forms the voice; but articulation requires the aid of the tongue, palate, etc., which are called instruments of voice.
                                        200. Co-

--- Page 178 ---
134      FR. BACON'S SYLVA &C.
    200. A certain kinship has been observed
between sounds from inanimate bodies or
animate ones that do not produce articulate
voice; and various letters of articulate voice.
For usually, they designate these sounds
by referring to similar articulate voices. Thus, the trem-
bling of water obtains a certain similarity with
the letter L; the quenching of metals
with the letter Z; the growling of dogs with R; the
sound of an owl with S. H.; the sound of cats with
the diphthong eu; the voice of the cuckoo with the diphthong
ou; the sound of strings with N. G. If anyone
therefore applies himself to this curiosity or novelty,
so that he wishes to impart a word to be pronounced
to a puppet fashioned by himself or to a corpse,
he ought first to consider the movements
of the instruments of voice, then to form similar ones in
animate bodies, and to attend to the cause of the conformity
of that similarity; and thus the
notion of that effect will become clear.

    *End of the Second Century of History*
            *Natural.*

                                    FRAN-

--- Page 179 ---
135

[Decorative horizontal band with floral and scrollwork patterns]

OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM,
NATURAL HISTORY

THIRD CENTURY.

Various experiments concerning the movements
of sounds in any line, circular,
oblique, straight, upwards, downwards,
forwards, backwards.

201. All sounds, whatever kind
they may be, move in a circle;
that is, in all directions, up-
wards, downwards, forwards, backwards;
which all instances demonstrate.
202. Sounds do not require to be conveyed in a straight
line to the sense, as
visible things do, but it can be curved; although
it is true that they move most strongly through a straight
line. Yet this is not due
to the straightness of the line, but to the shorter
interval; for a straight line is the shortest.
Hence if someone from the other side of an intervening wall's
part

--- Page 180 ---
136          OF FRANCIS BACON
side utters a voice, it can be heard from the other; not because the voice penetrates by passing through the wall, but because, being arched, it ascends beyond the wall.
     203. A sound stopped and reflected will reach the other side along an oblique line. Thus, if a curtain is lowered on one side of a carriage and raised on the other, if someone begging speaks to the closed side, he will seem to be standing at the open, not the covered, side. Also, a small bell or a large bell, for example, placed on the northern side of a room, and a window on the southern, he who is in the room will perceive the sound as if from the south.
     204. Although the movement of sounds is in a circle (for indeed a circle or spherical area is given to them), it is nevertheless most vehement, and is carried furthest along the front lines, and by the first local impulse of air. And therefore the voice of a preacher is more conveniently perceived from directly in front of the pulpit than behind or at the sides, even if it is open. So also a musket or a cannon will be heard further forward from the region of its muzzle than backward, or to the sides.
     205. It might be questioned whether sounds move better upwards than downwards. Pulpits are erected and stand out; and Empero-

--- Page 181 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 137
Emperors of old, when about to address the army, would ascend a platform made of turf, because a voice from [a] the level ground would encounter obstacles for listeners and for the speaker, who was equally low. But something of greater moment seems to be at play. For it might be that the spiritual species (or forms) of both visible things and sounds are moved more easily downwards than upwards. It is strange that a person standing on the ground sees those who are on the top of St. Paul's as of smaller stature, and cannot distinguish them; whereas the contrary happens to one looking down from the summit, where neither is the stature so much contracted, nor does all distinction entirely vanish. It is certain, however, that to one standing on high, the objects below appear diminished in appearance and in a more compact form; just as topiaries offer themselves more pleasingly to one looking down from above.

206. But so that the experiment may be accurately tried, let there be a room not far distant from the pavement, from whose window someone should speak as softly as possible to another standing in the streets, who should bring his ear as close as possible to a body permeable to sounds; and conversely, let the voice of the one standing below maintain the same proportion of softness, while the one in the room (applies) his ear to a body about to transmit sounds;

a] upon the level.

--- Page 182 ---
138        FRANCIS BACON'S
applies [his ear to it]. This will be the most convenient method
for exploring whether the ascent or descent of sound
is more advantageous.

Various Experiments concerning the Duration
and Evanescence of Sounds, and the Time
necessary for their Generation and Transmission.

207. The production of sound is momentary,
between which and its decay a short space of time intervenes.
And here a strange error of men is detected,
of those who consider that to be a continuation of sound, which
is nothing other than a renewal. For the percussion of the body
imparts a vibration to its minute parts, and thus
renews the percussion of the air. You may clearly infer
this from the fact that the dying sound of a struck bell
or string, which is considered a continuation, completely
ceases, as soon as the bell or string feels a hand
laid upon it, as in harpsichords, where the damper
falls and touches the string, the sound ceases. Also, if a
small bell is touched after being struck, the sound ceases.
Here a twofold vibration must be distinguished:
one manifest and local, as in a hanging bell; the other
hidden, of minute parts, such as is described in the 9th
instance. But it is true that from the local [vibration] there
                                                              accrues

--- Page 183 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 139
aid comes to the occult. We also see in
pipes and other wind instruments, the sound dying with the blast. Nor are we
ignorant that, where there is an illusion, a confused murmur wanders in the
organs for a time, while the bellows, namely, previously inflated, subside.

208. It is certain that the sound of a war engine, which has laid low many,
can be carried over at least twenty miles on land; much farther on sea; which
will reach the ears, not at the very moment of the explosion, but after an hour
or much later. Necessarily this is a continuation of the former sound, since no
vibration is detected from which it could be renewed, nor will contact with the
engine extinguish the sound more quickly; so that in greater sounds the
continuation is more than momentary.

209. However, in order that the time in which sound is carried may be
exactly observed, let someone ascend a pyramid or a lighthouse, having taken a
torch, to which a veil may be held before it; let another stand at the distance
of a mile. Then let him strike a bell, and at the same moment of percussion let
the veil be removed. The other, standing in the field, let him determine the
interval of time from the counted pulses of the artery, between the shining
light and the perception of the sound; since it is certain that light is carried
in a moment.

--- Page 184 ---
140          FRANCIS BACON'S
carried instantaneously. The same experiment could be tried at a longer distance, with the magnitude of light and sound proportioned to it.
     210. It is known to all from observation that an object of sight moves faster than one of hearing; since the flash of a cannon is perceived sooner by the eyes than its sound by the ears; which also usually happens in splitting wood, where, standing a little distance away, one will see the hand raised for the second blow before one has heard the sound from the first; and the greater the distance, the greater the anticipation; just as the flash of thunder, very far removed from us, precedes the crash by a considerable interval.
     211. When colors present themselves to the eyes, they are not accustomed to fading or diminishing gradually and by degrees, but a continuous vigor and efficacy persists, while sounds gradually perish: the reason is that colors do not participate as much as sounds do with the motion of the air; and that sound communicates somewhat with its local motion (as a necessary condition) is also evidenced by the fact that it perishes so quickly; since the cut and impelled air is continuously restored and reunites itself, which also happens in water, but not with equal speed.

                                                            Expo-

--- Page 185 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century III. 141

Various experiments concerning the passages and interceptions of sounds.

In exploring the passages of sounds, or conversely, you must observe lest in any body an exit to the side deceive you for a straight passage through. Therefore, the intercepting body must be closed very tightly, since sound escapes even through the narrowest crack.

212. Wherever sound passes through a solid and well-closed body (such as water, a wall, metal, as in stopped bells, etc.), it is necessary that that solid body be thin and slender, lest it completely extinguish the sound. Likewise, when someone speaks underwater with the help of air, the voice must not be too suppressed underwater, so that it can penetrate. So also if a voice is uttered towards the other side of a closed wall, excessive thickness will prevent it from being heard on the other side of it. Imagine a barrel to be empty, with sides two feet thick, and its opening closed; I conceive that the resonance from the communication of the exterior air with the interior will be faint, or no sound at all; with only the perceptible noise of the exterior percussion, as if the vessel were full.

213. It is certain that for sounds passing through solid bodies, the spirit or parts cooperate...

--- Page 186 ---
142          FRANCIS BACON
pneumatic parts of that body. But
this will be observed much more accurately if the sides of a hard
body are struck, than if they are struck from within, without an impact on the sides.
Therefore, take a bell, whose holes are stopped up,
and let it be suspended in a glass flask, the mouth of the glass being very tightly closed with wax.
Then, shaking the glass, observe whether the sound of the
bell is perceived, and how faint it is.
It should be noted that instead of a thread, a metallic
[a] cord should be used; or otherwise, the capacity of the
glass should be such that the agitation occurs without striking
the sides of the glass.
     214. It is clear that, by a long and direct arc perpendicular
(the sound-carrying line), sound is entirely extinguished;
so that what can be heard beyond a wall, is not
perceived beyond a temple; nor is it perceptible at any
distance from the wall, nor is it felt close to the
wall.
     215. Soft and porous bodies primarily suffocate
sound, if I may so speak, at its birth. For an impact
on cloth or skins renders the sound faint, as we have said.
But they admit sound passing through more easily than other
bodies; as curtains and tapestries show, not greatly
retarding sounds. Glass windows tightly closed, by repressing sound, more

     a] Wire.

--- Page 187 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century III. 143
are more effective than an equal thickness of cloth. Thus
it appears in the rumbling of the belly, how easily
sound passes through the intestines and membranes.

216. It is worthwhile to inquire whether larger sounds,
such as those of cannons or bells, when weakened by
passing through narrow cracks, become faint. For perhaps
the articulate subtlety of sounds passes through the narrowest
passages without confusion, but perhaps the magnitude of the
sound may hinder it from happening so easily.

Various experiments concerning the
medium of sounds.

217. The medium by which sound is carried is air;
also soft and porous bodies, and water; the hardness of
bodies is not entirely unsuitable for this vehicle of sounds:
but a dullness makes any of them useless for carrying sounds,
if you except air.

218. Drier and thinner air is not so suitable for
carrying sound as denser air, as nocturnal and evening
sounds show, and also a humid sky and south winds;
we gave the reason when we were discussing the increase
of sounds; namely, that the thinness of air is more penetrable,
but density is more suitable for the conservation of sounds
from diffi-

--- Page 188 ---
144          FRANCIS BACON
dissipation. Let an experiment moreover be made
through loud shouts in thin mists and drizzles:
for perhaps they may contribute somewhat to
extinguishing the sound.
     219. To what extent flame can be a medium
for sound (especially such as is produced by
means of air, but by no means among hard
bodies) let it be tried through speech with a bright
fire as an intermediary. Then indeed it seems
admissible, on account of some disturbance of
the sound, which the flame generates in itself.
     220. There was an experiment; whether other
liquids, used as media, produce a different
sound from water; as in the collision of the
arms of tongs, or by striking the bottom of a
vessel filled with milk or oil; which, even if they
are lighter, nevertheless have bodies more
unequal than air.
     We have dealt thus far with the nature of media,
which acquires its disposition from the compression
of air, or the opposite. We have treated this under
the heading of the transmission of sounds; the
figure of the hollow, through which passage is
given, also pertains to this; that now remains to be
discussed.

                                                  Expe-

--- Page 189 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 145

Various experiments as to how much the shapes of pipes or cavities, or of the bodies conveying [sound], contribute to the production of sounds.

   How much the shapes of pipes, or of the cavity through which sound passes, or of the bodies conveying [sound], contribute to the variety and alteration of sounds; whether a greater or lesser quantity of air received in the cavity is considered; or the space through which sound is conveyed more briefly or more lengthily, or other circumstances, we have treated under other headings. Here, a place is due to examining shapes, which I conceive as lines through which sounds pass. Such are straight, oblique, angular, circular, etc.
   221. The shape of a bell is not unlike a pyramid, except that its outline and expansion, as it were, slope down and expand more quickly. The shape of hunting horns and flutes is oblique. Straight horns are also found with as many oblique holes, but with a moderate difference in sound; except that straight ones are blown more forcefully. The shapes of flutes and pipes are straight; but these consist of a smaller and larger hole above and below. The trumpet has the shape of the letter S, by which that shrill sound is produced. In general, a straight shape
          G

--- Page 190 ---
146	FRANCIS BACON'S
straight [shape] produces the purest sounds; an oblique one [produces] a more hoarse and discordant [sound].
	222. An experiment can be made with a sinuous tube, with four bends; but also with a tube formed into the shape of a cross, open in the middle; likewise with an angular tube, and observe what variety of sounds they generate. Again, let there also be a circular tube, with an exactly sinuous roundness, with an opening inserted for the reception of breath; to which let another [opening] be added not far off, with an obstacle placed transversally, so that the breath may pass through the circle and thus reach the second opening. Furthermore, solid bodies of various shapes should be tested by their percussions, such as spherical, flat, cubic, cross-shaped, triangular, etc. Let there also be a combination of them; flat against flat; convex against convex; and convex against flat; and let the differences in sounds be accurately noted. Also to be explored are sounds produced by hard bodies of various thicknesses. I have experienced that the sound of a golden bell is excellent, not inferior to silver or bronze, indeed better. However, the sound of a gold coin is duller than that of a silver one.
	223. A lyre consists of a concavity, not along the length of the strings, but transversal; nor is any instrument so gradually deficient in sound over somewhat long intervals,
					as

--- Page 191 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 147
as the Irish lyre. Therefore I propose that if a harpsichord
were formed with a double hollow,
the former along its length, the latter
at the end of the strings, as in a lyre, it would
necessarily result that a more perfect sound emerges,
not so muffled and discordant. This should be tried
without a plank placed underneath, only
in the manner and form of a lyre, at one
end of the strings; or finally with a double
hollow, one at each end of the strings.

Various experiments concerning the mixture
of sounds.

224. A clear distinction appears among those things
which are perceived by sight or hearing, namely
that visible things pass through the medium unmixed,
while others are confused in the medium. For
when the eyes sweep across the sky, many stars,
trees, hills, people, beasts, all fall under
a single gaze simultaneously; nor is an image
emanating from one (object) disturbed by others
flowing together to the eye. Sounds, however,
poured forth from various parts, follow the
predominance of one. Also, the mixture of
dissenting voices is tempered into harmony;
which is denied to colors. But nevertheless,
the lesser light is extinguished by the greater light,
so that it escapes sight; like the light of a glow-worm
G 2 light

--- Page 192 ---
148 FRANCIS BACON
light from the sun; just as a deep sound
absorbs a faint one. Moreover, I propose that from two
glass lanterns, the one of scarlet color,
the other of blue, with a candle placed in each,
the lights tinted with these colors will be mixed,
and will impress upon white paper a purple
color. Also, the mixture of colors languishes
with weakness; for a place is illuminated more
by whitewashed walls than by black ones,
etc. But the reason which carries sounds confusedly,
and the images of visible things unconfusedly,
is that sight operates along a straight line,
and produces various cones: and in that
way no coincidence can occur in the eye or
at the visual point. But sounds, moved along
oblique and tortuous lines, must coincide,
and thus disturb each other.
   225. The sweetest and best harmony
is that which allows the sound of no instrument
to be heard by itself, but only one concord
from all; which is perceived at a just
distance, just as in the mixture of an incense,
or the sense of an odor scattered through
the air from various flowers.
   226. The disposition of the air as regards other quali-
ties, except in the mixture of sounds, is not of great
importance for sounds. For whether the air be clear
or dark, hot or cold,
                                                                 tran-

--- Page 193 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 149
tranquil or agitated (unless noise is present), pleasant or foul-smelling, or similarly affected, it matters little: since only a slight cause of alteration or difference can exist.

227. But sounds also mutually disturb and change each other; where one so overwhelms the other that it cannot affect the sensory organ. And there are cases where, insinuated into each other, they produce disagreement and confusion; sometimes, mixed into harmony, they coalesce.

228. Two sounds of the same clarity are not perceived over twice as long a space as a simple and single one; nor will two candles with the same quantity of light cause objects to be seen twice as far away as a single one. The cause lies hidden; but it seems that impressions from sensible objects are mixed with homogeneous ones, but without proportion, as we showed before. Perhaps the reason is that the first impression from the transition from privation to act (as from silence to sound, from darkness to light) is of a greater degree than if the sound increases from a lesser to a greater; and similarly, increases of light occur. That perhaps comes from the fact that the air, after the first impression, does not admit the supervention of another impression with the same appetite as the former. In which proportion
G 3 uni-

--- Page 194 ---
150 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OF FRANCIS BACON
in what proportion the increase of power in matter is universally measured, is a field of very ample inquiry, and demands the diligence of a special treatise.

*Various Experiments concerning the Improve-*
*ment of Sounds.*

229. From the concurrence of reflections, the sound is greater; but the body from which either the origin of the primary sound or the reflection comes, if it is pure or smooth, renders it more pleasing. An experiment could be made on a lute or lyre, whose hollow part is made of polished brass, not wood. We see that in open air, sound flows to the ears more pleasingly than from [*a*] metallic strings. Water also greatly aids reflections; which musical performances teach where waters are nearby, or Echo proves.
230. It is established by reliable experiment, that a pipe with somewhat moistened sides, but with the drops entirely shaken off, sounds more clearly than if it were dry; with a sweet whistle, as was said by us before under the title "On Inequality". The reason is that a porous surface, when it has been moistened, and as it were on the border of wet and dry, acquires some equality and smooth-

*a]* wire-strings.

--- Page 195 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 151
and acquire smoothness. But the hiss, whose
origin, in my opinion, is from unevenness, arises
between the internal surface of the pipe, which is both
smooth and moist, and the remaining material
from the wood, devoid of insinuated moisture and
dry.
      231. A frosty sky somewhat enhances the
grace of indoor music. The reason is
perhaps not the disposition of the air, but of the wood or
strings in instruments, which become more crisp,
and thus turn porous and hollow. Lutes also
sound clearer from frequent use than those
recently made, for the same reason. The same
is observed in lute strings kept for a long time.
      232. The mixture of free and compressed air
contributes to the improvement of sound; therefore,
let an experiment be made with a lute or barbiton,
which has a double hollow, one with
[_a_] a small circle like a rose above the strings; yet
so that sufficient space is left for the strings,
and room below the hollow for touching them.
Let the same be attempted with an Irish lyre
with a double hollow on both sides, which is
otherwise content with a single one. It may be
doubted whether such an excess of resonance
would not cause one note to anticipate another.
      233. Sound produced in the mouth of a drum,
                                 G 4               modulated

   _a] vvith a Knot ouer the Strings._

--- Page 196 ---
**152 FRANCIS BACON'S**
modulated voice makes the voice sweeter. I believe the same would happen if a song divided into parts were introduced into various drums. Also, for the sake of elegance and novelty, it would be worthwhile to stretch a curtain between the place where the drums are located and the audience.

234. Although pneumatic instruments generate sound between the breath and the air, the sound communicated to a more uniform body of the pipe is nevertheless better. For without a doubt, the trumpet produces a sound with some difference from a wooden pipe, and again, the trumpet from a brass pipe. It would not be useless to test the sound from pipes and brass hunting horns.

235. Attention benefits sounds, when the common sense, being most collected, departs into the particular sense of hearing, and the operation of sight is suspended. Hence also night, more than day, makes sounds increase in sweetness and magnitude; which I believe happen more pleasing to the blind than to others. Also, between sleep and waking, while the languishing senses, as if bound, cling, sweeter music is perceived than when they have fully awakened.

Expe-

--- Page 197 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 153

Various experiments concerning the imitation of sound.

236. It is a certain miracle of nature,
if it captures sustained attention,
that boys and some birds are capable
of astounding dexterity in imitating voices. For birds, the mouth
of the speaker and its movements are unobserved, yet they are
taught no less correctly in a dark as well as a light place.
It is of no small curiosity concerning sounds from speech,
the learning of which would seem not to be without difficulty. But
the difficulties presented at the beginning gradually decrease in such a way
that repeated attempts, from time to time, with the progress
of intervening time, overcome them. But this does not
remove the novelty of the matter. Perhaps someone might think
(although, to tell the truth, it could provide a just cause
for admiration) that there is a certain transmission of spirits,
which, moved in the teacher, generate a predisposition
in the spirits of the pupil so that he is invited to imitation, which
is thus gradually perfected. But the operation
involving the transmission of spirits (a great secret of nature)
awaits its treatment elsewhere; especially where an inquiry
into the powers of imagination will be instituted.
As far as imitation is concerned, it is by no means to be entirely
G 5 denied

--- Page 198 ---
154      OF FRANCIS BACON
we cannot deny that there exists in man and other
creatures the ability to imitate. It is obvious
how skillfully and promptly monkeys and
long-tailed monkeys express the gestures and movements of men.
And in the capture of birds which they call [a] Dottrells,
it is clear how artfully that bird acts while it
imitates a monkey. Nor has anyone, having frequented the
company of another (for he is aware), failed to learn
certain gestures or a voice or another mannerism.
      237. Birds demonstrate that instruction is not
necessarily required for the imitation of sounds,
which have mutual lessons among themselves,
without reward for imitation, either from food or elsewhere.
Moreover, parrots are found not only to imitate the voice
of their trainer, but also laughter, tapping,
striking, the creaking from doors moved on their hinges,
or of a cart, in short, whatever sound they encounter.
      238. No beasts, except birds,
are able to imitate human speech. For the monkey,
otherwise a ready imitator, fails in expressing
speech. I have seen, however, a mastiff,
which would reproduce a howl introduced into its ears
for some space of time. But which of the birds,
compared to other beasts,

   a] of Dottrells.

--- Page 199 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 155.
beasts, the skill of imitating speech,
is a matter for further investigation. It is agreed that birds possess instruments
adapted for this use, such as lips, teeth, etc., more similar to human
ones than to those of brutes. The neck, through which the
gullet descends, many beasts as well as birds have
long. Let the inquiry be extended further, whether the
throat and the rest of the apparatus in birds is more
excellent? Birds apt for speech are the parrot,
woodpecker, jackdaw, magpie, raven; among which the parrot
has a hooked beak, the others by no means.
239. But this ability of birds does not arise so much from organs suited for speech, as from
attentive listening, since hearing and learning produce speech,
and birds have greater care in observing sounds than other
beasts; which is both from an innate natural delight and from more frequent
exercise, as is evident from their singing. Those also,
who undertake the labor of instruction, strive to keep them watchful, as if to increase their attention,
nor are we unaware that among singing birds, males
have a certain prerogative; the cause of which is perhaps both greater
vivacity and sharper listening.
240. Diligence and an attentive skill in expressing
voices for facilitating imitation
G 6 many-

--- Page 200 ---
156 FRANCIS BACON'S
This contributes very much. Hence you find pantomimes who reproduce the voices of actors so deftly that you would be truly persuaded they were present, even unseen. A similar principle applies to other voices.
241. There are found those who imitate voices as if carried from a greater distance (distance being a secondary object of hearing), so that you would imagine the speech of bystanders to proceed from afar, not without a certain dread. The reason should be investigated; but I recognize no use for it, except where one wishes to act the impostor, with a feigned speech as if of spirits.

**Various Experiments concerning the Reflection of Sounds.**

There are three kinds of reflections in sounds: concurrent reflection, iterative reflection (which is Echo), and super-reflection (an Echo from a previous Echo). The former having been discussed under the title of the magnitude of sounds, the two latter are now to be treated.
242. The reflection of emanations from visible objects can be directed by means of mirrors, inasmuch as these, having emanated and advanced in straight lines, can be brought to some point; but the reflection of sounds hardly allows itself to be governed, because sound more loosely occupies space in curved lines.

--- Page 201 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 157
...filling space with curved lines, does not admit such a control, hence the method of preparing artificial echoes has not yet come into use; and whatever Echo has hitherto become known does not admit a reflection in a narrow place.
   243. Natural Echo is generated in walls, wood, rocks, hills, and banks. Water, however, where it is nearby, creates a concurrent Echo; where it is far distant, it produces an iterative one. For concurrent and iterative Echo are distinguished in no other way than by the swiftness or slowness of the reflection. But it is beyond controversy that just as water promotes the transmission of the original sound, so it serves for the Echo to be carried further.
   244. It has been said in previous [sections] that when a voice is uttered through a body permeable to sounds, with one end of it stopped, the return of a breath can be felt at the mouth, but not a sound: the reason is that the preservation of the original sound by means of the obstruction does nothing for the preservation of the reflected [sound]; moreover, the generation of echoes, unless from clear sounds, is altogether rare.

--- Page 202 ---
**158 OF FRANCIS BACON**
It should be tested whether speech sent into hollows, with no other return path than that by which the voice descends, generates an Echo just as in wells.

245. Echo travels circularly in the air, like the primary sound; whence it would be expedient to explore whether repercussion from a body about to form an angle would create an Echo, like the return towards a wall, etc. as we see in mirrors a similar angle of incidence is given from the object to the glass, and from the glass to the eye, and if you strike a ball transversely, not on the surface, an equal rebound will occur. Whether Echo also produces this effect (that is, whether someone standing at the side of the reflecting body hears better, or indeed where the voice is uttered, or anywhere in a straight line) could be tested; likewise if he stands closer to the place of repercussion than the speaker, or vice versa. At the same time, it would come to be known whether Echo, like the original and primary sound, is stronger nearby.

246. There are many places creating various forms of echo, of which one follows another and is received. That happens where various hills or shrubs exist, dissimilar to each other, whether nearby or distant; so that the very last return also happens to be perceived by the ears.

247. Just as voice circularly both forward

--- Page 203 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 159
ward as much as backward towards the speaker, so also does Echo. For many echoes are perceived from behind due to the nature of the place where you stand.

248. For an echo to return voices distinctly three, four, or five times, a proportionally just distance from the reflecting body is necessary. For nearby (though with such an interval that a concurrent echo does not emerge), it returns with a sudden rush, and not too much air compression is also required. For air compressed over a great distance produces the same effect as free air over a small distance. Therefore, in the experiment of speaking into a well, however deep, the voice suddenly returns, and only two words are returned.

249. As for echoes arising from a previous one, a new instance of this is given from a place, the description of which I now undertake. It is distant four or five miles from Paris, not far from the village of Pont-Charenton, and the place is about a bow-shot's distance from the Seine, a narrow chapel or temple; all of whose walls, both at the sides and at the ends, remain standing, and a double series of columns in the manner of ambulatories in temples, with absolutely no vaulting, at each column, of branches

--- Page 204 ---
FRANCIS BACON
a heap of branches/twigs equaling human stature,
which a boatman, brought down the river on rafts
not in small boats, deposits in that place (as it seems)
where he may lighten himself, I perceived a voice
emitted from one side to return thirteen times at distinct intervals,
and I remember from report it was reflected sixteen times.
I was there at three o'clock in the afternoon, but the most convenient
time (as happens with any echo) is evening.
It is manifest that the procession of echoes does not occur from various places, but
that there is a tossing of the echo back and forth
like a ball, just as it tends to happen in reflections
of mirrors. If you substitute another mirror for the front mirror,
this latter one will return the front mirror with its image,
and vice versa, and so on, a super-reflection occurs,
until the species of the species, extinguished, vanishes,
as it gradually retreats into shadow, weakened by each return.
Thus also a voice sent into that chapel generates species of species,
and reflections succeeding each other,
each of which dies out weaker than the preceding ones.
So much so that if you utter three words,
perhaps it will return three distinctly,
in successive turns of time completely, then, with the time interval decreasing,
the two latter ones, finally
for some time it will repeat the last voice,
and will fail, unable to languish further.

--- Page 205 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 161
unaware. An echo of a single return performs something significant if four or five words are heard. This Echo, returning in such multiple reflections, offers more than twenty words to be perceived by the ears.

250. A similar echo from an echo, but with a double reflection, is observed if someone, in the middle between a house and a hill, strikes a lyre towards the hill; for the house produces an echo of the sound coming back, and one is transmitted to the other, so that the last one is weaker.

251. There are also letters which Echo can barely pronounce, such as S, especially an initial one. I remember when I was once going to Pont-Charenton, there was a Parisian present, a man of advanced age, who interpreted this defect of pronunciation as coming from a good genius. "For if," he said, "you utter the name of the Devil, Echo will not return it at all, but 'vat'en,' which in French is the same as 'begone!'" It occurred to me that Echo does not reflect the letter S, inasmuch as it is only a hiss and an internal sound.

252. Echo is sometimes swifter, and bounces back immediately from the uttered voice, as has been partly said; but another proceeds more as if deliberate, that is, leaves more space

--- Page 206 ---
162 FRANCIS BACON
leaves between the voice and the reflection;
which either the nearness or distance of the place
causes. Some it sends back words with a longer
interval, some with a shorter; others clearer (with
clarity equal to the original voice, sometimes
greater) others weaker and more diluted.

253. If Echo emerges varied from various places
at the same distance, it is necessary that a kind
of chorus of reflections exists; whence also a
greater recurrence, indeed even a continuous Echo;
which in certain places is accustomed to happen
like a theatre.

254. Investigation has not yet taught whether,
as with visible images, so also in sounds,
refraction occurs. For I persuade myself that if
sound is carried through different media (like air,
cloth, wood) it will not emerge in a different
place than where it was tending; and this
is the first mode of refraction. Amplification,
however, the other mode of refraction, is
manifest in sound (as was most fully demonstrated
to us when we were there) but with the diversity
of the medium contributing nothing to this.

We have incidentally sprinkled various instances
drawn from sight and visible images to illustrate
the nature of sounds. But it seemed worthwhile
to us to dwell more broadly on a comparative
demonstration.
                                                     Expe-

--- Page 207 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 163

Various experiments concerning the agreement and disagreement between those things which are perceived by sight and hearing.

255. Both spread themselves circularly, and fill a whole orb, but not beyond certain and determined limits of progression; they languish and gradually die out according to the proportionate distance of objects from the sensory organs.

256. Both sustain an entire and undiminished species/form, and insinuate themselves into any minute parts of the air and the medium; and just as species/images introduce themselves unconfusedly through narrow cracks and pass through, as is evident, in the indicator of the instrument of equilibrium as regards sight; and in fissures and cracks as regards sounds.

257. Of both, the sudden and easy generation and propagation, with equal swiftness of vanishing, namely, when light is removed, and bodies emitting sound (are removed).

258. Both receive and carry with them exquisite and accurate differences, such as colors, figures, motions, distances in visible things; the tones of articulate voices, songs, vibrations in audible things.

259. Both seem to pour forth nothing of a corporeal effluvium into the medium, by which it might complete the sphere of its activity, nor is there eviden-

--- Page 208 ---
164      OF FRANCIS BACON
nor evidently to impress a local motion upon the medium through which it passes, but merely to carry away spiritual propagations with them. The cause of this phenomenon, since the diligence of investigators has not hitherto fully applied itself to it, will deserve examination in its proper place.
   260. Both appear to be generative of no effect, except for that which is appropriated to their object and sense; and apart from that, everything else seems sterile.
   261. But both, by their own proper action, manifestly produce three effects: the first, that a species more (so to speak) quantitative and of greater impression subdues a lesser and weaker one, as sunlight subdues the light of a glow-worm, or the roar of a cannon subdues a voice. The second, that any object in excess and overwhelming destroys the sense, as sunlight destroys the eye, or a violent sound near the ear destroys hearing. The third, that both admit repercussion, as in mirrors and Echo.
   262. Neither destroys or hinders the species of the other, even if encountered in the same medium, just as light or color does not remove sound, or vice versa.
   263. Both affect living beings by objects moving the senses in diverse ways, depending on whether they have been pleasing or displeasing; which however,

--- Page 209 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 165
which however, if rightly attended to, also affect inanimate things, namely having a certain conformity with the organs of both senses. Thus visible objects operate in mirrors, which are not unlike the pupil in the eye; and audible objects in echo-generating places, which resemble the concavity and structure of the ear.

   264. The actions of both vary according to the varied disposition of the medium. Thus a trembling medium (such as smoke) imparts trembling to the object; and, being capable of intensity and remission, it raises and lowers sound.

   265. Air is a most convenient and favorable vehicle for both; for water or glass cannot compare with it.

   266. If the object of either is subtle and precise, one must have the senses alert and attentive; to such an extent that the contraction of the eye follows the purpose of most distinct vision, and the ears are pricked up, arranging themselves for precise hearing; which is more evident in beasts having mobile ears.

   267. Rays of light, multiplied by collection, generate heat, by an operation far different from vision. But sounds, conglomerated and multiplied, generate a great quantity of air...

--- Page 210 ---
166 FRANCIS BACON'S
rarefaction of the air, a material action, and dissimilar to the production of sounds, if antiquity does not deceive us, which narrates that birds fell down at the shouts of the gathered multitude raised to the sky.

*Differences of those things which are perceived by sight and hearing.*

268. The species (images/forms) emanating from visible objects seem to be certain emissions of the rays constituting them; such as something that happens in widely propagated odors; except that those (species) are carried more separated from the body, and the species striking the hearing (ear) communicate more with local motion, as if impressions made in the air, and its percussions; thus whatever is corporeal, when it exerts its action in a twofold manner, either by really communicating its nature, or motion, the former diffusion is to be assigned to visible things, the latter to audible things.

269. The conveyance through the air is more manifest for audible things than for visible things, since the barrier of a struggling wind does not greatly (in my opinion) impede the perception of these (visible things), while in those (audible things) the contrary happens in their conveyance.

270. This above all must be noted, the diffe-

--- Page 211 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 167
difference between the objects of sight and hearing, from which other differences of lesser importance flow; namely, that those (with the exception of light) are carried in straight lines, these in curves; which mode of diffusion least incurs the inconveniences of mixture or confusion, as we said before that sounds are subject to these. Hence the solidity of bodies hardly creates an impediment to vision, provided they are transparent, with pores turned towards straight lines, as in glass, crystal, diamond, water, etc. However, a thin veil or handkerchief, although less solid bodies, obstruct sight, while on the contrary porous [materials] offer little impediment to hearing, but solid ones either stop or rather attenuate [sound]. Hence also, for reflecting the rays of visible things, small mirrors suffice, but for the reverberation of sounds, larger spaces are required; which was not omitted by us in the preceding [sections].

271. Visible things present themselves to the sense at a longer distance than sounds, with the proportion of magnitude preserved, whereas to a more remote interval a more intense sound may spread than a tiny body can be seen.

272. Visible things are conveniently perceived only with some interval given between the sight and the object, audible things, the closer they are to the sense,

--- Page 212 ---
168 OF FRANCIS BACON
the closer they are brought, the better they insinuate themselves.
But a twofold error occurs here: first,
because, since vision is not accomplished without light,
if any object touches the pupil so as to completely
cover it, light is excluded. I remember
hearing from a most trustworthy man (one of whose
eyes had suffered from a cataract) that he had
seen nothing more clearly and accurately
than a silver needle, while it was being moved in his eye
to remove the membrane of the cataract;
the reason for which, doubtless, was that the needle,
being smaller than the pupil, did not obstruct the light.
Secondly, the object of sight directly strikes the pupil
without any interception; the hollow of the
ear receives little sound because of the organ, but
some distance is nevertheless required in both cases.
   273. Visible things are swifter than audible things
in affecting the sense, which appears in thunder and
lightning, in the flame and the impact of a cannon
shot, and in the repercussive motion of air when
wood is split. These things we have indeed given
in advance, but they properly belong here.
   274. I believe that sounds emanating to the ear
persist longer in the air than species (images)
carried to the eye; which nevertheless themselves also
remain for some time in the intermediate space,
as is evident in rings spun around representing
certain spheres, in strings

--- Page 213 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. *169
on tortoise-shell strings struck by a plectrum, a torch
moved rapidly, which marks a trail of light
behind it, in twilight and similar situations.
But I would not hesitate to assign a larger
duration of delay to sounds, with the winds
rolling them up and down, and because of the
interval of intervening time; to which opinion
I am led by the explosion of a cannon perceived at
twenty miles.
    275. From visible things is absent that quality from which they might become
unpleasant, which does not happen so with audible things.
For the sight of shameful things displeases in this,
that they rather pluck at the memory of obscenity,
than that they immediately present them to the eyes.
Therefore, pictures representing somewhat immodest things do not so
offend, as in audible things a saw while it is being sharpened,
since it also sets the teeth on edge. In
Music, the ear rejects anything contrary to harmony.
    276. If from surrounding light you enter a dark
place, or vice versa, the eye is dazzled
for some time, and sight is confused.
Whether we experience something similar after
great sounds or deep silence, requires more
accurate investigation. It is a report of remote
antiquity that those who dwell near the cataracts
of the Nile are deaf. But something similar [is observed]
in bombardiers, millers, and bridge-
                H               workers

--- Page 214 ---
**170 FRANCIS BACON**
and to those inhabiting [bridges], it is not observed.
277. Such a weakness seems to be inherent in the impression of colors, that it acts only through straight lines and rays converging into a cone, whose base is in the objects and its apex in the eye, so that there is a kind of pointed confluence and conjunction of rays; which, propagated by that emanation, cannot generate secondary light except by reflection alone; these are not to be dealt with by us here. For passing rays moderately tint the neighboring air, whence colors are seen outside the straight line. But as that is observed in these, so the contrary holds true in a luminous body. For if a screen is placed between the eye and a candle, the light nevertheless falling onto the paper guides the writer, yet the candle's flame is invisible; if a colored object is set up in its place, the color will not present itself to the eyes. Sound shares in this latter nature, when a voice heard with two walls standing on either side (as far as I indeed judge) is not only the primary sound progressing in an arcuate line, but also that which, traversing the wall in a straight line, generates a similar circular motion to the former, but weaker and more fading.

                                                     Expe-

--- Page 215 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 171

Various experiments concerning the sym-
pathy and antipathy of sounds among themselves.

   278. All consonance and dissonance in music is nothing other than the antipathy and sympathy of sounds, also in that music which they call broken, or associated. From the blending sounds of certain instruments, the combination of these exists more pleasingly, one with another (a matter hitherto not sufficiently diligently observed), as the Irish lyre is best joined with a barbiton of a deeper tone, and the pipe with music to be played on strings; organs do not reject accompanying singing voices, etc. But harpsichords and the lute, or the Welsh-British lyre and the Irish lyre, deny that a solo voice can properly blend with pipes. But many things remain to be brought back to experiment regarding the refined conjunction of instruments, from which a great addition would be made to the grace of more refined music.
   279. It is now commonly known that if a straw is placed on one of the strings of an inverted lute or barbiton, and nearby there is another lute, whose string, unison with the former, is plucked, the string corresponding to this one in the inverted lute moves; which is evident to the eye when the straw is shaken off. Something similar happens
               H 2               ger

--- Page 216 ---
172          FRANCIS BACON
get if an octave in respect to that string is struck
in the same lute or viol, or
in different ones placed very near. But nei-
ther experiment produces a repercussion of sound
that can be discerned, but a mere
and simple motion.
     280. A method devised for constructing a viol
with a lower series of [a] metal strings
very tightly applied to the hollow, as in a lute;
then strings made from gut are arranged over a
bridge placed underneath; which is usually
observed in viols; so that the striking of the
upper strings affects the lower ones by sympathy,
and a more pleasing sound reaches the ears. If the outcome
corresponds to the intention, then by consent
the sound emerges not only from the primary motion, but
also from a secondary one or repercussion.
But this invention lacks practical use, because the upper
strings, when touched in various ways, cannot maintain an
octave or unison with respect to the lower ones,
which are not touched in this way at all:
but what it might contribute in instruments which
do not [b] have a "touch," as they call it, is to be
explored; such as harpsichords and lyres,
in which a double series of strings should be tried,
omitting the interval.
                                        281. Pos-

     a] Wire-Strings.
     b] which have no Stops.

--- Page 217 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 173
281. A transfer of the proven sympathy in instruments that resonate with strings could be made to other things that produce sounds by themselves; and it could be investigated whether, if one of two bells is struck, a movement would be felt in the other; which will succeed better here than in any other arrangement. Also, in pipes, the same principle of sympathy should be observed, if they correspond both in holes and in sound, whether a light straw or feather would move when the unison of the other is blown.
282. It is established by the testimony of both the eye and the ear that the organs of the senses have sympathy and conformity with that from which reflection arises, as said before. For just as the light of the eye is not unlike crystal, or glass, or water, so in the ear there is a winding cavity with a hard ossicle for receiving and reverberating sounds, and that has a similarity with places from which Echo emerges.

Various experiments concerning impediments and aids to hearing.

283. Yawning impedes the sense of hearing, because of the stretching of the membrane in the ear, which repels sound rather than admits it.
284. Retention of breath makes for more exact hearing, than if the contrary happens; and

--- Page 218 ---
174 OF FRANCIS BACON
and indeed, in every listening that catches sounds coming from afar, the breath is usually held. The reason is that every exhalation is a movement repelling outwards rather than attracting sound; and whenever we apply ourselves more diligently to a task, and with a vehement intensity of effort, we, as it were, hold the breath drawn inwards; and every more difficult capture of a sound escaping the hearing is a kind of effort.

285. For the aid of hearing, let an instrument be made in the manner of a funnel, concerning whose good success I do not despair. Its narrow part should have a thickness corresponding to the hollow of the ear; the end should open more widely, and like a bell around its edges, to half a foot or more, where it narrows, let it be moved very close to the ear, and let it be observed whether a sound freely permeating the air can be distinctly perceived from a greater distance than without such an aid, so that it may be, as it were, an [a] ear-spectacle for drawing in sounds. I have understood that something similar has been devised by the Spanish, which, applied to the ears, facilitates hearing for the hard of hearing.

286. Although the mouth may be very tightly closed, a murmur is produced from the palate, customary for mutes, which

*a] Eare-Spectacle.*

--- Page 219 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 175
which ceases when the nostrils are simultaneously closed, unless it is in the back of the palate towards the throat: which clearly shows that the sound, with the preceding one excepted, proceeds from the palate through the nostrils with the mouth closed.

Various experiments concerning the spiritual and subtle nature of sounds.
287. The repercussion of sounds (called Echo) strongly demonstrates the spiritual essence of sound. For if it were corporeal, the generation of the secondary sound or repercussion would be the same, as regards the manner and instruments, as that of the primary: But the pronunciation of words requires various and exquisite instruments, which no structure of a similar kind recognizes for their return; but a mere impediment, whence repercussion arises.
288. The exquisite distinctions of articulate sounds permeating the air deny that they are mere impressions in the air, as was also well observed by the ancients, with a refutation against those who held that opinion. For seals serve impressions excellently, to which the first generation of sounds exhibits something analogous, but their transmission and continuation, without a distinct imprint, exclude them from the category of impressions.
289. Its origin is sudden, and to that
H 4 mode

--- Page 220 ---
176 FRANCIS BACON
its disappearance is likewise sudden; but neither does that, as an accurate difference, contain anything we should greatly wonder at. [a] For **quavering and warblings** in the lyre and pipes match that speed, and the tongue (certainly not a delicate instrument) in pronouncing excites no fewer movements than there are letters to be pronounced in all words. But the very swift origins of sounds (if I may so speak) do not deserve admiration as much as their momentary diffusion, extending very far in every direction; for example, a voice loudly uttered in the middle of a field travels around a [b] **furlong** to be perceived; and that in articulated sounds, each of which resides in the smallest particles of the air itself, and the transmission is completed in a space shorter than a minute.
      290. The sudden generation and evanescence of sounds has one of these two causes: either because the air, having suffered force from the incoming sound, restores itself, which happens in water, which, when divided, produces various circles until, having regained its original consistency, it settles; or because the air absorbs sound, as being most pleasing, without reluctance, but cannot retain the ingress of sound, due to a hidden appetite for its reception, which afterwards, being thicker and more

--- Page 221 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 177
and more material qualities of the air suffo-
cate. Thus the hostility of the air, or of another
body by which it is surrounded, immediately extinguishes a brightly generated flame.
These are the differences of sounds, by which
they are generally divided: 1. Musical, un-
musical. 2. Grave, acute. 3. Dull, sharp.
4. Subdued, clear. 5. Exterior, inter-
ior. 6. Liquid, harsh, or with a hiss.
7. Articulate, or inarticulate.
Hitherto we have devoted no negligent effort
to inquiring into the essence of sounds,
partly because it is commonly numbered among the noblest
mysteries of nature, as I said at the beginning,
partly because it is a power both free from body
and exempt from interaction with matter,
of which few such exist. Moreover, it has pleased us to
propose these former centuries as an example
of exact inquiry, and as it were to construct a standard,
which we ourselves will also provide in certain
other matters, for those deserving the same
diligence. For this alone we do, that we may
impress upon men that genuine
and legitimately instituted inquiry into natural things
is a work full of severity and dignity;
and that they may accustom themselves, with the
light collected from particulars, to expand their minds
to the amplitude of the whole world, and not
confine this universe to the narrowness of their own
mind. H 5 Expe-

--- Page 222 ---
178 FRANCIS BACON'S

A Solitary Experiment concerning
Splendid Colors in the Dissolution
of Metals.

291. The dissolutions of metals exhibit vivid and pure colors; gold a remarkable yellow, mercury an exceedingly green, tin an intense blue. The same is observed in their putrefactions or rust, such as minium, green color, Bise, cissus, etc., and also in vitrifications. The reason is that their hardness is due to enduring fire or strong acids, and they can be held in a uniform arrangement; they also retain part of their principal spirit. These two, namely, uniform arrangement and agile spirit, are primary in rendering colors bright.

A Solitary Experiment concerning
the Prolongation of Life.

292. If such liberty shall have been established for human actions, that they undertake nothing *invita Minerva* (against their natural genius), but are urged on by their genius, the prolongation of life will rely on the best aids. To this contributes a gentler motion of the spirits, so that, being less predatory, they do not so much consume the body's vital fluid. Then actions are to be circumscribed by rules and moderation, exercised in

--- Page 223 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. *Cent. III.* 179
in mutual command. For victory and a not vain opinion of command generate the best disposition for the spirits, especially when a gradual process is instituted, where the sense of victory is more vigorous. The former example is provided by rustic life; the latter, by the institutions of Monks, and those who have wholly applied themselves to cultivating Philosophy, and who continually master themselves.

*A solitary experiment regarding the ap-petite for union in bodies.*

293. All bodies have an appetite for uniting themselves, and avoid the solution of continuity; and of this appetite, various degrees are given, but the three most worthy of observation, and which can be distinctly noted, are: The first in liquids, the second in solids, the third in glutinous and tenacious bodies. Of these, liquids exhibit this appetite but faintly, conspicuous in the connection as if by threads in dripping water, where they conglomerate into round drops (this is a kind of union), and where they persist for some time in bubbles and foam. The appetite of the second degree is more ardent in iron, stone, wood, etc. The third remains in the middle, on the border of both the former, where bodies partly adhere, being compliant to the contact of another; partly H 6 len-

--- Page 224 ---
180          FRANCIS BACON'S
viscosity do not abandon continuity,
whence they allow themselves to be drawn into threads, like pitch,
glue, birdlime, etc. But it must be noted that there is in
all solid bodies more or less tenacity,
so that they delight more in the contact of some
tangible thing than of air. For even a
small quantity of water adheres to the surface of a solid
thing, and metals also adhere
unless weight pulls them down and tears them away. Gold
leaf, or any leaf from metals,
adheres. But glutinous and viscous bodies are more
indifferent in their appetite for the drawing of another
body, and for preserving their own cohesion,
and therefore are mixtures of that kind
which delight more in the embrace of an external body,
than in their own preservation,
and in which dryness and humidity
do not very much prevail.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
        *the similar operation of heat and time.*

   294. Time and heat agree in many things.
Heat dries out bodies which easily
evaporate, such as membrane,
leaves, roots, clay, etc. Thus time or
age dries up, as in the bodies already
mentioned, heat dissolves spirituous bodies, as
various liquefactions show; it performs the same
                                                                 in

--- Page 225 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 181**
in others of softer consistency, as in honey, which age renders more liquid, in sugar, old oil, to which clarity brings heat for medical use. By heat spirits are loosened, and seek an exit, which is attested by the volatility of metals. The same is effected by time in the rust of iron; but generally, the effects of heat and time differ in the interval within which they are completed: there short, here long.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning the diverse operations of Fire and Time.*

295. Some things, having undergone fire, first soften, then harden, as the crumb of bread; some things fire hardens, afterwards softens, as the crust of bread, biscuit, sweet-meats, salt, etc. The reason is, that in those things which are hardened by time, the operation of fire is a certain kind of liquefaction. But in those things which are softened by time, the operation of fire is a certain kind of concoction, and all things thoroughly cooked by fire, time in some way dissolves.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning Motion from Imitation.*

296. Motions pass from body to body, not so much excited by imagination,

--- Page 226 ---
182          OF FRANCIS BACON
as invited, primarily by a prior in-
clination and aptitude. Thus the opening of the mouth,
stretching, yawning, pass from body to body,
arising from the slowness of the spirits,
which vapor weighs down, or something similar,
and they strive to shake off the impediment
to their agility. Thus a sleepy person,
and one who in a paroxysm of fever is accustomed
to yawn and stretch, even emitting
voice and sound after the expulsion,
meanwhile, another person similarly
disposed is invited to imitation by the sight,
just as laughter is transmitted from one to another.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
            *contagious diseases.*

   297. Some diseases harm by transmission,
others do not; those primarily attack the
spirits, nor do they have their seat so much
in the humors, whence they are trans-
mitted from body to body, such as
pestilential diseases, eye inflammations,
and similar ones. Secondly, they also infect
the soul with a manifest migration from
body to body, for they do not escape sight,
unlike those which affect the spirits. In this
kind is consumption of the lungs, etc. Thirdly,
they also penetrate into the skin, in which they
manifest themselves, the contagion being transferred
into the air, or to an adjacent body;
especially those whose (bodies are) rather fatty,
                                                     nor

--- Page 227 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III. 183
nor is it an easily dispersible substance, like
scabies, leprosy. Fourthly, those which infest the mass of humors, not adhering to spirits, soul, or exhalations, which harm only by contact, and indeed of such a kind as is peculiar to the Epidermis. Such are, poison, the French disease, and the bite of a rabid dog.

*A solitary experiment concerning the*
*incorporation of powders and*
*liquids.*

298. You would see most powders cohere more tightly when water is mixed in than with oil, although oil is a thicker body, like flour, etc. The reason is from the affinity of bodies, which, the greater it is, makes for a more perfect imbibition and incorporation. And this (affinity) exists more greatly in most powders with water than with oil: however, painters' colors and ashes are better incorporated with oil.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*bodily exercise.*

299. Frequent movement and exercise is beneficial to some bodies, to others, rest or gentler movement. To a warm body which does not abound in humors, excessive agitation causes harm; and in this, physicians err—

--- Page 228 ---
184        FRANCIS BACON
Physicians [err], that they encourage men of such a bodily constitution to exercises, which will be harmful to them, living on a stricter diet. But with increasing exercises, a fuller diet should correspond; and for those more sparing in food, such should also be the exercise; whose advantages are these: First, that it transmits nourishment more to the parts to be nourished; then, through sweats, it facilitates excretion, whence a more perfect assimilation in the parts; third, that it renders the body more solid and compact, and less subject to predatory spirits. The opposite evils are: that it inflames the spirits, makes them predatory; that it absorbs and too much attenuates the body's humidity; that it too much shakes the internal parts, especially violent exercise, which rather enjoy quiet. In general, if exercise is too much, it is adverse to the prolongation of life; whence women are longer-lived than men, because they move less.

   *Solitary Experiment concerning*
      *foods which induce satiety.*

   300. With certain foods often and for a long time

--- Page 229 ---
      SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. III.    185
as being cold and dry. But sweet and
fatty foods satisfy more, and cling more around the mouth of the sto-
mach and fluctuate, nor do they descend as quickly, and they are more
easily changed into bile, which is hot, and always removes appetite.
Another cause of aversion is in frequent use, when appetite is stimulated
by new things, and therefore foods too frequently consumed produce
nausea. If anyone, moreover, wishes to give causes of
satiety, pleasantness, novelty, and not only distin-
guish foods and drinks, but also move-
ments, loves, companionships, pleasures, studies,
which we are accustomed to enjoy, or which we dislike, he would
en-
ter a very wide field of inquiry. But as for
foods, the cause is attraction, which is swifter and more excited towards
new things than towards those whose lingering taste from previous use
has not yet, as it were, vanished from the palate's judgment. And
in general, this is the reason, that cus-
tom reconciles us to those things which were at first unpleas-
ant, and vice versa; but things that are alluring at the
beginning of use produce sudden nau-
sea.

    End of the Third Century of History
              Natural.
                            FRAN-

--- Page 230 ---
286          FRANCIS BACON

[Decorative woodcut ornament]

FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM
NATURAL
PHILOSOPHY

CENTURY FOUR.

Various experiments pertaining to the clarifi-
cation of liquids, and the
acceleration thereof.

[Large decorative initial V] It is observed that to anticipate by art the time of nature working in accelerating its effects, is deservedly to be reckoned among the Great Works of Nature. Moreover, and indeed, after the creation of matter from nothing, that retraction, as it were, of time in advance, approaches divinity in the second place. Therefore, to explore these inner recesses, the labor of our inquiry proceeds; setting aside for another place the acceleration of germination, for which we reserve a general treatise on Plants. Now we will pursue accelerations engaged in other matters.

301. Very many liquids, permeating their whole
substance, at first exhibit dregs, being turbid,
such as must, beer not sufficiently boiled,
or

--- Page 231 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 187
or chyle of beer, expressed juices of shrubs and herbs, etc. Waters, over time, when they have settled, are allowed to clarify. To achieve this more quickly than usual, however, is among those things which most commend themselves by their own significance. For by applying stimuli, we impel nature, into whose order we thus invade, perverting it. That thing also has an excellent use in drink, in the speedy preparation of potables and condiments, and other things pertaining to the same. But it is necessary to preface the productive causes of clarification before understanding the aids promoting it. Separation provides the first cause, by which the somewhat thicker parts of the liquid are separated from the thinner ones. The second is the equal distribution of spirits in liquids along with their tangible parts; which, by itself, is also effective in making bodies appear non-turbid. The third is the attenuation of the spirits themselves, from which transparency is brought to the liquid.

302. Weight accomplishes separation, as we observe in the obvious sediment of liquids; also heat, motion, precipitation or sublimation (that is, the propulsion of various parts upwards and downwards, a kind of species of attraction), adhesion, as when a more viscous body mixed with a liquid is agitated,

--- Page 232 ---
188         OF FRANCIS BACON
is agitated, which afterwards, being separated, contracts
the thicker parts; finally, percolation.
      303. The equal distribution of spirits is achieved
by moderate heat and motion (the time for which these operations are performed in anticipation
is not specified), and by the mixture of another body, which
has the power of opening the liquid, and renders the spirits
apt for permeating.
      304. The attenuation of spirits is also accomplished
by heat, motion, and a body mixed in, endowed with the
faculty of attenuating. Now, however, after the causes have
been explained, so that the acceleration of clarification to be
instituted may proceed universally, attention must be paid
to these instances and experiments.
      305. It is obvious to free wine or beer from dregs
by drawing it off, so that they may more quickly obtain clarity.
For dregs, however much they may be useful for preserving
the strength of the drink and for warding off corruption longer,
nevertheless they have likewise produced something thick.
And this instance relates to separation.
      306. On the contrary, I do not consider it a useless
experiment, what dregs, not native to the liquid, contribute;
which, although generally they disturb liquids, nevertheless
attenuate spirits. Therefore, take a twin vessel filled with fresh
beer, and pour dregs drawn from one into the other, observing
                                                                what

--- Page 233 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 189
...you will observe what notable thing this operation shows. All of this aims at attenuating the spirits.
307. To fresh beer, mix a moderate quantity of old [beer], and observe whether clarification is hastened by opening the body of the beer, and by dissecting the parts that are thicker, so that they may be aggregated with the dregs. This is an instance of separation.
308. The longer malt or herbs, or something similar, is infused into the body of the liquor, the more it usually becomes thick and turbid. But the longer the decoction, the more it is effective in clarifying. And the reason is clear, which dictates that more thick matter is mixed into the liquor the longer the infusion is prolonged. But decoction, by its longer duration, serves to purify the surface, or to cast the dregs to the bottom. Therefore, the most exact method of clarification is, first to infuse, then to decoct the infusion, as is customary in beer, into which malt is first put, which is afterwards decocted with hops. This pertains to separation.
309. Place burning embers around a bottle full of fresh beer at such a height as to reach the neck, and let it be accurately stoppered so that nothing flows out. With the embers renewed daily for up to ten days, continue the same operation; when this is completed, compare it
                                  with

--- Page 234 ---
190 FRANCIS BACON
with another bottle of the same beer. More-
over, take quicklime and slaked
lime, on which the bottle, as before, is to be placed.
These things aim at both distributing the spirits in equal pro-
portion and attenuating them by heat.
310. Drive the liquid contained in the bottles with fre-
quent shakings up and down,
or arrange for them to be carried by vehicle over rough and uneven
ground twice a day. But take care that if they are
filled to the top opening, there is not a lack of space for the air to ventilate. For if the li-
quid reaches very near the stopper, it lacks free flow and return; this liquid,
thoroughly agitated in all parts, transfer
into another bottle, tightly closed in the usual manner.
For much inherent air imparts paleness to the drink,
and causes that there is not everywhere a good and even sediment.
The bottle thus kept for a space of 24 hours,
again transfer into another which does not
lack air, as before, and again into another which is
corked, as said. According to this rule,
continue the repeated work for seven days. But
it must be hastened, lest a slower transfer make the drink turn
pale. Also, let it be tested without that,
with a moderate amount of air below the bottle's neck.
The equal distribution and attenuation of spirits
by movement claims this instance for itself.
311. Per-

--- Page 235 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 191
311. Internal and external percolation (which
pertains to separation) should be attempted by an
experiment of clarification through adhesion, where
milk is poured into fresh beer and agitated with it;
for perhaps the coarser parts will adhere to the milk.
But the difficulty is whether milk allows for separation,
which can be known by an easy trial. For the
clarification of Hippocratic drink, milk infused is used;
soon, after separation has occurred, the coarser parts
are gathered to the milk, as stated elsewhere. Here,
this method of clarifying by percolation is advanced,
where fresh beer is to be decanted, with a strainer
applied, for the greater or lesser fineness of which
there exists a variety of clarity.

Various experiments concerning maturation
and its acceleration, first regarding drink,
then regarding fruits.

We proceed to a full inquiry into accelerating
maturation, which is threefold according to a threefold
object, namely the maturation of fruits, drink, ulcers,
and apostemes. This last species is now set aside by me
for another place, where we shall dwell on medical
experiments. There are also several other maturations,
such as of metals, etc., the descrip-
tion of

--- Page 236 ---
192          OF FRANCIS BACON
we shall complete that description as the subject matter and its context allow. Now it pleases us to begin with the maturation of drink, because of its affinity with the treatise on clarifying liquids, which we have just left.
     312. The maturation of drink is accomplished by the gathering of spirits, where the coarser parts are more perfectly digested. This consists of the same aids as clarification (of which we spoke before); but it must be noted that through the ultimate efforts of clarification, the spirits are rendered so smooth that they become sluggish, and the drink becomes flat, which ought to moderately effloresce. Hence, drink from amber is served as if dying.
     313. The degrees of maturation can be observed in must, in wine [a] suitable for drinking, and in vinegar. Among these, must does not have spirits well-gathered; wine obtains them well-united, so that they render the parts more oily; Omphacium indeed has them gathered, but more meager and in a smaller quantity, with the thinnest parts for the most part dissipated by exhalation. For we see vinegar prepared when a wine vessel is exposed to the warm sun, nor is that burned, because exhalation has drawn out and dispersed very many of the thinner parts.
     314. Drink, having died by becoming flat, revives

a] as it is in Drunke.

--- Page 237 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 193
...revives and casts off mold if the spirits are enlivened and strengthened by their motion. So clear air loosens the spirits and renders them more vigorous by motion. Also, the transfer of fresh beer into bottles (so much so that when the lid is removed, it sparkles) produces a livelier drink and fills it with effervescence; and for renewing the effervescence, a pan furnished with coals and placed in the cellar is conducive. Fresh drink mixed with one that is fading provokes fermentation; just as fresh-brewed beer (if the truth is told) applied to old beer causes a new effervescence. Nor would I deem it useless to mix in things from which the spirits may become more mobile and stronger, such as if nitre, lime, mud, etc., are introduced into the bottles. It is known that cream matures and rises more quickly at the virtual contact of cold applied to it, from which the whey seems to sink.

315. It has been proven by experience that if someone buries full and well-stoppered bottles under dry earth for some period of time, or lowers them to the bottom of a well, or (which is better than the others) keeps them suspended a little above the water of a deeper well for [a] two weeks, the drink gains strength. For cold does not cause the exhalation of spirits as much as heat does, although

[a] for some fortnights space.

--- Page 238 ---
194          FRANCIS BACON
than it rarefies the dregs, but it makes them
vigorous, and by irritating them, it incorporates them more perfectly into all
parts of the liquid.
   316. The ripening of fruits occurs when spirits are drawn
to the outer parts of the body, and
thus equally dispersed in their passage. There is also
some digestion of the coarser parts by heat,
motion, attraction, and the rudiments of putrefaction,
the beginning of which serves as maturation.
   317. Apples are sometimes placed in
straw, hay, flowers, lime, mud; they are covered
with onions or [a] sour apples, or enclosed in wax or a
box, etc. An apple is also suspended
in smoke. All these experiments
have had the following outcome.
   318. After the space of a month, an apple
covered with wax had preserved its complete greenness
and vigor, but with whitish grains; the reason
is that the exclusion of open air (which is always
predatory) keeps away everything that consumes
moisture and vigor in the body. But the disadvantage
is that the taste of the wax spoils the flavor. A pomegranate
(as I indeed believe) or a similar fruit with a
hard and thick rind would be least subject to this danger.
   319. An apple exposed to smoke resembled an
                                                              apple

a] Crabs.

--- Page 239 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 195**

...an apple mild, old, wrinkled, dry, soft, sweet, yellowish inside; the reason is, because such heat, not liquefying or scorching (for we see how more intense heat makes roasted apples so soft that they also liquefy, and also those pears [a] which, divided into four parts, are scorched by a fire placed beneath, resemble charcoal in the toasted circumference of their skin), promotes ripeness and does not scorch. Smoke also covers it as with soot, which contributes to ripening. Pears likewise and plums to be dried in an oven, removed from the emitted moisture from time to time, show evidence of not dissimilar operation, though with a more intense force of heat.

320. Apples immersed in mud and ashes were fully ripe, as the gently pleasing yellowness indicated; the reason is, because that degree of heat inherent in mud or ash (as it is [b] constant in its evenness) among all approaches most closely to the genuine, since it neither liquefies nor dries out, which is truly the best ripening. It is to be noted that these apples were of pleasing flavor; a simple experiment and most suitable for use.

321. Apples, hidden among crab apples and onions, had ripened well. Nor to heat I 2 ad-

[a] Pigs-feet, made of Quarters of Wardens.
[b] Smoothering.

--- Page 240 ---
196          OF FRANCIS BACON
...to be ascribed to heat, but to spirits,
permeating the entire body with an equal distribution
and removing hardness,
while sour apples and onions provoke them.
Thus an apple draws ripeness from an apple,
and apples, by being placed together, are
mingled in heaps; and a grape,
touched by a grape, draws hastened
ripeness; a cluster against a cluster ripens more
quickly.
     322. Those placed on hay or straw obtained
a lower degree of ripeness than the others,
than apples placed under straw acquire a more complete one; because
hay or straw contain the minimum degree
of heat, but more tightly enclosed and gentle,
and operating least towards drying out.
     323. Those enclosed in a box were brought
to ripeness, because heat is present in the air
clinging within the enclosures, as is evident in wool,
skins, velvet, &c. It should be noted that each
apple in so many experiments, when compared
with another of the same kind kept separately,
had, in respect to the latter, superior sweetness
and yellowness, and thus excelled in ripeness.
     324. An apple or a pear or similar
fruit, from a more vigorous rolling on a table,
it is known by the common experience, to soft-

--- Page 241 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 197**

...to soften, and immediately to sweeten, the spirits being distributed only gently into parts, whose unequal distribution creates harshness, but hard rolling is a medium between simple concoction and maturation. Therefore, it would not be improbable that by gentle rolling, perhaps twice a day, thus continued for a week, maturity is achieved through increments most emulating nature.

      325. From an apple, cut off a small piece of the skin, then put it back, so that you may experience what that solution of continuity does for speedy maturation, since a cluster of grapes, or another fruit, gnawed by a wasp, fly, or worm, sweetens more quickly.

      326. An apple pricked all over with a point, with holes not deeply impressed, lightly anoint with Spanish wine, cinnamon water, and spirit of wine for up to ten consecutive days, to prove whether it can thus shed its crudeness by applying the heat which the virtue of wine and strong waters carries.

      What was done in the preceding experiments should also be repeated in these, so that by using a similar apple for comparison, the difference in yellowness and sweetness may be explored.

            I 3            Expe-

[Marginal notes on the left, partially cut off:]
[unclear]ribus
[unclear]lentis
[unclear]os pro-
[unclear]urita-
[unclear]lo d
[unclear]ue
[unclear]fe-
[unclear]m

--- Page 242 ---
198          FRANCIS BACON'S

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the making of gold.*

Up until now, the hope of making gold has disgracefully deluded the world, which hope I declare not to be vain, nor to exceed the limits of human faculty. But the means destined for this effect labor under fallacies and errors, as far as practice is concerned, and embrace nothing sound in their concepts, as far as Theory is concerned. For that which nature is said to intend, namely the conversion of all metals into gold, and not to deviate from its goal if freed from bonds and impediments; and that metals, once their crudities and impurities are purged, and their roughness removed, will turn into gold; and that a moderate quantity of Medicine injected into base metals is sufficient for changing a great quantity into gold and for multiplying it – these are mere dreams; to which the remaining foundations of Alchemy are consonant.

In order that this fable may be handsomely adorned, Alchemists call upon many vanities from Astrology for help, and have other subsidiary aids from natural magic, from superstitious interpretations of scripture, from oral traditions, and from fabricated testimonies of the ancients, and other things of this kind. On the other hand, it cannot be denied that not a few useful things

--- Page 243 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 199
useful experiments, and a certain
restoration of the world. But we, about to treat of the
transmutations of bodies and experiments
pertaining to metals, will show the true and
well-trodden paths of nature, and certain footsteps
leading, whence light may shine forth upon so notable a work.
We praise the industry of the Chinese, who, having
despaired of the making of gold, toil in preparing
silver, diligent even to madness. For that former
(gold), certainly most weighty and among metals most
endowed with matter, has difficulties not easily
explained, such as you would not find in others,
by no means equaling the weight and matter of gold;
and it would be of lighter labor to prepare silver
from lead or mercury, even though these exceed the
weight of silver, since rather a greater degree of
fixation is required than any condensation. Meanwhile,
while we encounter axioms pertaining to maturation,
we will provide an experiment for maturing metals
by a method of change, by which some of them may
turn into gold. For thus I am convinced, that if
metals have been properly concocted, digested, and
matured, easy paths for producing gold lie open.
And here it occurs to me, that a German became
known to me, whom, by his boasted knowledge of
preparing gold, more closely to a distinguished man and an intimate
          I 4               familiar-

--- Page 244 ---
200	OF FRANCIS BACON
intimate familiarity. I was present at his discourses, when he said that such a thing could be done, but that common Alchemists spoil their attempts with too little intense fire. For the making of gold, he said, requires a justly tempered heat, as it is a subterranean work of nature, into which a moderate heat emanates, but more precisely regulated than in other metals. And so he would accomplish it by the use of a large lamp, whose heat would be regulated and equal, and it would be the work of several months. The device of the lamp savors of foolishness, but what concerns too vehement heat, the ruin of the whole undertaking, and reducing it to equality, and a just space of time, is not entirely to be rejected.
	Therefore we return to our axioms concerning maturation, previously designated by us. Let the first be, that heat be applied within moderation, which indeed is that sufficient for digestion and complete concoction. The legitimate temperature of heat, however, is estimated from the fact that it is accommodated to the nature of the subject; while it is suitable for fruits and liquids, in metals it is considered ineffectual. Secondly, that the spirits of the metal be quickened, and the tangible parts be opened; for without these two aids, whatever you attempt with the metallic spirits will be useless for the digestion of the parts.

--- Page 245 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 201

...parts. Third, that the spirits may disperse themselves equally, and not move by leaps, which will render the parts tightly closed and flexible. Here heat is required, not varied in intensity and remission, but as much as possible, continu-ously equal. Fourth, that no passage may lie open for the spirits, which must be retained, since with them emitted, the body becomes hard and rough. That will be effected by a temperate fire and careful closing of the vessel. Fifth, that the most suitable metals for transmutation may be chosen and optimally prepared, whereby the work will be facilitated. Sixth, that a just space of time may be granted to the operation; not that hope may be prolonged (as is customary among Alchemists), but that nature may unfold itself in a suitably determined interval. These principles are most certain and most true, from which now the rule of experiment is to be derived, which perhaps a longer meditation might disapprove.
      327. Let a narrow furnace be prepared, and a temperate heat be excited, and indeed such that it may keep the metal perpetually liquefied, not more vehement; which is of the utmost importance for the matter. Let the material be silver, a metal most symbolizing with gold; with it also let a tenth part of quicksilver be added, a twelfth part of nitre of just weight, which by vegetating, and the body of the metal
                  I 5                      ape-

--- Page 246 ---
202          FRANCIS BACON
serve for opening. Let the operation be continued for at least six months. I would also like oily substances to be injected sometimes, such as are used for recovering gold distressed by the torments of separations; to that end, that the parts may be arranged more closely and more smoothly, which is a matter of great importance for the undertaking. For gold, as is well known, is the most compact and the heaviest of all metals, and most flexible and extensible. *Note*, no one should hope to make gold from quicksilver, for the reason that it is weighty; for mercury is in no way [a] equal to resisting the testing flames; in my judgment, copper should merit the second place after silver, being a material approaching most closely to the aptitude of the former.

   *A Solitary Experiment regarding the Nature of Gold.*

   328. Nature has granted these prerogatives to gold: that it is of the greatest weight, with its parts closely shut, possessing fixation, flexibility or softness, lacking rust, and having a yellow color and tincture. Therefore, the safest method of preparing gold (but involved in long circuitous ways) is, that a diligent search be made for the causes to be brought forth into open knowledge, through

   a] *Endure the Mannage of the Fire.*

--- Page 247 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. *Cent.* IV. 203
attention should be paid through the aforesaid natures, and the axioms concerning them should be observed. For if anyone could produce a metal similar to the one named before, they might doubt whether it is gold or not.

*Various Experiments concerning the Pro-*
*duction and Acceleration*
*of Putrefaction.*

To overcome the delays in hastening putrefaction has something most worthy of universal and most widely diffused inquiry, since corruption corresponds conversely to generation, and those two are, as it were, the circumscribing boundaries and confines of operating nature, by which it entirely encloses itself; a twofold guide to life and death. Putrefaction is the action of spirits which attempt to depart from the body, so that dispersed into the air they may enjoy the free Sun. That attempt of spirits to be gathered into the body of the air (which, in its egress, takes a step) has five indications of diverse effects. If a more vehement movement agitates spirits detained in the body, liquefaction follows, as in metals, etc.; if a gentler one, digestion or maturation, as in drink and fruits. If spirits are not entirely detained, but are moderately pushed forth by a confused and disorderly movement,
I 6 exi-

--- Page 248 ---
204 FRANCIS BACON
putrefaction occurs, whose nature is to very unevenly dissolve the body's consistency, as in flesh, rotten apples, phosphorescent wood, etc., and also appears in the rust of metals. But if that motion proceeds in a certain order, it is vivification and formation, as shown by living things generated from putrefaction, and those of that kind which are more perfect. If an exit is open to the departing spirits, drying, hardening, consumption, etc., follow, as bricks show, and the evaporation of a liquid body.
     329. The aids which contain the causes of putrefaction and accelerate it are what the following text describes. First, if a raw or watery humor is added, as witnessed by the moistening of any flesh, apple, wood in water, etc., whereas preservation is due to somewhat oily and fatty substances.
     330. Second is invitation and excitation, as if a rotten apple is applied to a whole one; or if dung (a substance that has undergone total putrefaction) is added to other bodies. Cemeteries, in which burials are made daily, provide a clear indication of this, where the earth consumes any recently placed corpse much more quickly than pure earth.
                                        331. Third

--- Page 249 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 205**
331. Third, is a tighter compression of spirits, which forces them more violently into their prison than they can bear; whence irritation and an attempt to escape, as in grain and clothes which have contracted mustiness, and which are accustomed to be preserved by ventilating and blowing air. A broader proof of this matter is provided by fevers, which usually arise from obstructions and from humors that are congested and cause putrefaction.
332. Fourth, is the solution of continuity, as we see in apples, which, when cut or pierced, experience more rapid corruption, and also wood, etc., and animated flesh from a wound inflicted somewhere.
333. Fifth, exhalation or dispersion of the principal spirits, which in the body are the true bond of consistency. Their governance being disturbed by dissolution, any part withdraws into its own sphere to be aggregated with homogeneous parts. Thus urine and blood, when cooled, dissolve. Such an effect also manifests itself in gangrene or the mortification of flesh from opiates, and which intense cold also produces. Nor do I establish anything else concerning pestilence, where the malignity of contagious vapor agitates certain principal spirits with a sudden movement, and drives them out so that it may strip them of their command. Then humors, flesh, & secun-

--- Page 250 ---
**206 FRANCISCI BACONI**
secondary spirits are dissolved and broken, as happens in Anarchy.

334. Sixth, if an extraneous spirit, more potent than the body's domestic spirit, should enter, as in serpent stings. This is the general reason, that any poison whatsoever creates a swelling, which is likewise generated from spirits congregating too much, as in wounds and collisions, or if they are too compressed, as in a swelling from cold; also spirits arising from putrefaction in fevers, etc., which, though extraneous, even if born within the body, extinguish and suffocate the natural spirits and heat.

335. Seventh, such a weak degree of heat, that the spirits are only moderately moved, and cannot either digest parts or expel spirits; as is evident in meat preserved in a place not cold, whereas in a cold and humid larder they are kept longer. It is also known that vivification (to which putrefaction relates as a bastard brother) is from a gentle heat, as proven by the hatching of eggs, the heat of the womb, etc.

336. Eighth, a loosening of spirits, which previously the solidity of the receptacle had compressed, with the desire to exit restrained, as in artificial rust produced by strong waters (acids), on iron, lead, etc. Therefore, moistening rust

--- Page 251 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 207
accelerates it, or the putrefaction of any
body, when softened, and the crust giving a way to the
departing spirits.

337. Ninth, the alternation of heat or
cold, wet or dry, as in the [*a*] mouldring
of earth, and its dissolution into the smallest particles,
in frost and sun; in the more rapid
corruption of wood, if it is alternately moistened and
dried.

338. Tenth, is time and the operation
and process of spirits, dislodged from their
proper place, especially of those left to themselves without
any agitation or local motion, as in
grain that is minimally ventilated, and in human
bodies lacking exercise.

339. All [*b*] mould is the rudiment
of putrefaction, as mould on bread,
oranges, and lemons, which in the
course of time turns into worms, or
decays more disgustingly; whence they usually
emit a stench. If the body is liquid,
and not one that putrefaction easily pervades
entirely, it will cast dregs onto the surface, as we observe
in the dregs of distilled waters.

340. [*c*] Moss seems to be a certain species
of mould on earth or trees, but
                                        more

*a*] *mouldring.*
*b*] *moulds.*
*c*] *moss.*

--- Page 252 ---
208      OF FRANCIS BACON
rather be considered a true rudiment of germi-
nation, to which we refer it.
   \*Various Experiments concerning the Pro-\*
      \*hibition & Anticipation of Pu-\*
               \*trefaction.\*
   Those things have a most worthy use in inquiry,
by which putrefaction is kept off, and by which
we preserve the integrity of bodies, which are
subject to a twofold danger of dissolution, namely,
of desiccation, or consumption, and of putrefa-
ction. These things, moreover, in human
bodies and other living things (through fevers,
worms, consumption of the lungs, aposte-
mes, ulcers both internal and external) occupy
the greatest part of the books of Physicians and
Surgeons. Wherefore, those things constituting
this inquiry we assign to a special title,
which will range through medical experiments
of every kind. To the rest we assign this
place, to which the preceding (discussions) can
shed light, where we treated of accelerating
putrefaction by artificial means. For the causes
of putrefaction being removed, putrefaction
itself is excluded.
   341. The first thing that prevents putrefaction
is cold, since food and drink remain uncorrupted
longer in winter than in summer. Flowers
also and fruits in sno-

--- Page 253 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 209
in snow conservatories preserve their freshness unimpaired; the volatile parts, namely, being detained and the tangible parts compacted.
342. Secondly, astringency, which resists dissolution, since generally astringent medicines ward off putrefaction. The same principle of astringency causes a small quantity of oil of vitriol to prevent water from putrefying. This astringency inheres in the substance, whose virtual cold it is, and which operates almost in the same way as cold (substances).
343. Thirdly, the exclusion of air, and its admission, which, though opposite in nature, nevertheless produce the same effect (as often happens), depending on the condition of the subject matter. Thus wine or beer from accurately closed bottles acquire a certain durability. Underground granaries preserve grain longer than above-ground ones. Fruits enclosed in wax do not lose their freshness, bodies immersed in honey or flour remain fresh, and the liquids of drinks and juices, with oil poured over their surface, do not cease to be fresh. On the contrary, if clothes are not exposed to air, moths breed in them and they become moldy. The reason for the diversity is that the exclusion of air, where the detention of volatile parts is needed, for bodies

--- Page 254 ---
210 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OF FRANCIS BACON
enables bodies to remain whole, which drink and grain prove; but where the emission of spirits is required for expelling superfluous moisture, those bodies which need to be exposed to the air suffer harm.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;344. Fourth, motion and agitation are adverse to putrefaction, which requires rest. For the subtle and imperceptible motion, which causes putrefaction, is disturbed by agitation, and local motion preserves bodies and their parts whole. Thus, a granary, where grain is winnowed or turned over, as if in an hourglass from a higher place to a lower, prevents the inconveniences of initial sweetness. Flowing water lacks putrefaction; and the human body also expels it with frequent exercises. On the contrary, rest, lack of motion, or obstructions (by which obstacles the flow of humors and the motion of perspiration are stopped) promote putrefaction, as we partly indicated a little earlier.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;345. Fifth, the exhalation of adventitious moisture in bodies. For since moistening accelerates putrefaction, a just and suitable drying (namely, by restraining the radical moisture) excludes putrefaction, as in herbs and flowers; which if in the shade ex-

--- Page 255 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 211
if they are dried or exposed to the sun for a short space of time, they are best preserved. For the emission, indeed, of the loose and adventitious humor brings forth the radical [humor], and carries it away with itself in association.

346. Sixth, the strengthening of spirits
in the body: for as great heat resists the putrefaction
of bodies, and slow heat renders them more subject to the same; so also
a spirit powerful in strength preserves, while a weak
and languid one paves the way for corruption.
Also, the corruption of salty waters is kept off longer than that of sweet [waters]; and oysters sprinkled with salt
and foods by means of aromatics exclude putrefaction longer. It could be tried whether
the same effect would be had if lime were added to waters or drink,
and sourness would be removed longer. Beer of better quality
surpasses thin [beer] in durability, and whatever is hot or aromatic,
in the preservation of liquids and powders, has no small use, etc., as much
because they strengthen spirits, as because they allow superfluous humors to be filtered out.

347. Seventh, the separation of crude
parts, rendering the body purer. For the imperfection of mixture
reveals the harm of dreaded putrefaction, to which watery things
have a greater tendency than oily things. For distilled waters last longer
than crude [waters], and those which have undergone fire,
than others.

--- Page 256 ---
212          OF FRANCIS BACON
more durable than others, such as dried pears, etc.
   348. Eighth, the continuous drawing out of the pu-
trefying part, which is usually a loose
and watery humor. Nor does the aforementioned reason alone
demand this, that it simultaneously provokes
and carries away the radical humor, but
because, if not evacuated, by the contagion of the part it
occupied, it infects the rest; as shown by
the preservation of bodies with balms; of which
there is a similar reason in fruits, herbs, flowers
stored under bran or flour.
   349. Ninth is, the mixture of an oily
or sweet substance, things of which nature do not so
much incline to putrefaction, and little
air is allowed into them, which, being uncorrupted,
are the cause that others are such. Thus syrups and
ointments surpass juices in durability.
   350. Tenth, the mixture of some
dry body, because putrefaction begins from the spirits,
then from the humor. But dry [things] are
free from putrefaction. Thus smoke pre-
serves meat, as is evident from hams,
beef tongues, smoked beef.
   351. This was the opinion of some among the an-
cients, that the preservation of bodies
in a permeable air is longer than
in air that is not such. They seem to me to have established
nothing beyond probability, because air,
permeable by wind, if it were overloaded [and] compressed-

--- Page 257 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 213
and compressed, it almost completely prevents the ingress
of all exhalation, rather it repels it. An ex-
periment was made in a bladder distended with air,
in which meat had previously been placed; and also
a flower; but with a misleading outcome, because dry bladders
refuse to be inflated, [and] fresh ones promote putrefaction.
That should be attempted with air more vehemently driven by
bellows into a barrel, into which
those things which require preservation should first be placed,
so that at the moment the bellows are withdrawn,
the opening may be tightly closed.

A solitary experiment concerning luminous
wood in the dark.

352. We have certainly given no small effort to properly
investigate the experiment of wood luminous in the dark;
and the more willingly, because it excels in its greatest
durability, compared to other things emitting light among
us, with a movement scarcely perceptible to the senses.
Fire and flame are a continuous consumption. Sugar
shines only while it is grated, seawater while it is
agitated, glow-worms while they live,
or a little after, fish scales only when putrefying
seem to be of the same nature with shining wood.
Nor are we ignorant that there is an internal motion
in all putrefaction, no differently than in fire, or
light. Such was the outcome of that experiment.

--- Page 258 ---
114        FRANCIS BACON
diligent attention perceived. 1. Light from certain
parts emerges more vigorous, from others, more di-
luted, but the greatest does not equal the splendor of a glow-worm.
2. Woods emitting a small light of themselves
are willows, ash, and hazel.
Perhaps the same may be found in others.
3. Roots and bodies shine; but that roots
may have the prerogative of light. 4. The color
of the luminous part elsewhere whitens by day, elsewhere
is reddish, as country folk call it. 5. The particle
sparkling is softer and to the touch
moist, others more solid, so that the figure of a cross
or a die can be carved from it. But an image
it will not render, nor will anything similar be represented
thus in a luminous body, nor
will anything else fashioned in glowing iron occur,
the boundaries of the luminous and dark being confused
which exhibit a figure. 6. The luminous part was cut
until the point where the splendor terminated,
but after two days exposed to dew, the part
next to the luminous part shone with light, so that the disper-
sion of putrefaction seems to propagate. 7. Another
dead wood of the same kind,
and emitting no inherent light, one
night imbued with equal splendor, placed outdoors.
8. Moreover, another wood was at hand,
which previously shone, then in
the house where it began to dry, within four
or five days ceased to radiate, having been
recovered.

--- Page 259 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 215
having recovered its usual splendor through the air to which it was exposed.
9. Luminous wood kept dry darkens within seven days, but if placed in a cellar or dark place, it retains its light.
10. The perforation of such wood, then exposed to the open air, aids its brightness; the reason is that every dissolution of continuity promotes putrefaction, as stated before.
11. No wood of observed splendor exists if it is cut while alive, but only that which, while sprouting, has begun to feel decay in its roots and trunk.
12. A part of luminous wood smeared with oil will preserve the light by which it shone for [a] 14 days.
13. The outcome was similar for those (parts) that were steeped in water, indeed, much better.
14. It has not yet been explored what contributes to the longevity of the light, such as keeping it outdoors every night, removing it during the day, and sprinkling it with water.
15. The reliability of the experiment showed that, exposed to the air with harsh frost, it had suffered no harm.
16. A considerable portion of the root emitted splendor, which, when cut off, while that (splendor) died out; nevertheless, after two nights, even when kept in a dry place, it radiated with new light.

   *A solitary experiment regarding the acceleration of birth,*
   353. The acceleration of birth in living creatures
*a] a Forthnight.*

--- Page 260 ---
216          FRANCIS BACON
in animals has a double respect; if either
maturity and hastened perfection are granted
to the embryo, or some way of being delivered
from the maternal confines is given. In the
first way, there is something not unpraiseworthy,
which testifies to strength; the second is malignant,
and moreover has a symptom or disease as its cause.
Therefore, the true observation of the ancients
is that a seven-month birth is usually vital,
but an eight-month birth is for the most part
mortal. But the reason assigned is fabulous,
namely, that the eighth month begins the period
of Saturn's reign, a planet (according to their
fictions) malignant; but in the seventh month,
the Moon reigns, a more benign planet. But
from truth, this reason is given: if the birth
anticipates the ordinary time by so great a space,
it is to be ascribed to the vigor of the infant;
but if by a lesser space, it is a defect of maternal
weakness.

*Solitary Experiment concerning the ac-*
     *celeration of growth and stature.*

354. Rapid increases in human stature are
either from a fuller diet, or from the nature
of the nourishment, or from a more vigorous
and excited heat which nature confers.
As to the former, excess in food is harmful,
as it rather distends the body and makes it broad,

--- Page 261 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 217
rather than long, progressing. An image of this in plants is seen, which rarely attain height when, while tender, they begin to spread out widely. As for the nature of nourishment, let it not be too dry, because infants fed with milk, in regions where its use is frequent, surpass in height those for whom nourishment from bread and meat is more common. It is also a common saying among the people that daisy roots [a] boiled in milk (which have a remarkable drying property) make dogs small. Nor is it disputed that excessively dry food causes a retardation of stature. Furthermore, let the food possess an opening power, whereby the humor is thinned, and spirits are promoted upwards. Nor is it without reason that Xenophon so highly commends the use of cardamom in raising Persian infants, as it contributes to growth and a more agile bodily habit. Cardamom is called nasturtium in Latin, which herb, when tender, is pleasant to eat. The excitation of native heat occurs most effectively through exercises, so that consequently in frequented schools, the sedentary life of boys detracts from their growth, whereas country people, not sent to similar gymnasia, are generally of better stature. Care must be taken again-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

--- Page 262 ---
218          FRANCIS BACON
again, care must be taken lest anything cold in its operation be given to children. Also, prolonged feeding on milk is detrimental to the intellect and ruins the body's constitution. An experiment showed that puppies fed on milk, to which nitre was added, remained small, but were exceedingly lively, since its spirit is cold. And although an excellent medicine for prolonging life is available for adults, nevertheless, in children and tender living beings, it places an obstacle to growth, for the same reason; for it is heat that promotes accretion. But when a person reaches the limit of a settled age, the heat consumes the spirits, which the colder spirit in nitre condenses and corrects.

*Various experiments concerning sulphur*
*and Mercury, two of Paracelsus'*
*principles.*

There are two great families of things, designated by various names: sulphurous and Mercurial, chemical appellations (as far as salt, their third principle, is concerned, it is composed of the other two); flammable and the opposite, mature and crude, oily and watery. For it is clear that sulphur and Mercury in subterranean places are, as it were, parts of their own tribes. In vegetables and life
                                        pre-

--- Page 263 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 219
To things endowed with vegetable and animal life, water and oil are given. In the lower order of pneumatic things, air and flame. In the higher, the body of a star and pure ether. For these pairs, although primitive differences of matter separate them, nevertheless seem to agree in many things; since Mercury and sulphur are the chief matter of metals, and water and oil of vegetables and animals, differing only by maturation or concoction. Flame, according to common opinion, is only ignited air, both (air and flame) being very similar in swiftness of motion and easy cessation. And interstellar ether (even if it is a vain opinion that a star is a denser part of its own orb) has such an affinity with stars that rotation is observed in both. Therefore, it is among the deepest secrets of nature to turn water or watery juice into oil, and of greater moment for us than that mutation of silver or quicksilver into gold.

355. Instances commonly given where crude and watery substances migrate into fatty and oily ones are of four kinds. The first consists in a mixture of earth and water, which, mixed by the help of the sun, collect a nitrous fatness, with an excess of that which is found separately in each; as is known from that...

--- Page 264 ---
220      OF FRANCIS BACON
is known, that they produce plants, to be nourished
by the tempered juice of both.
    356. The second [instance] is in the assimilation of food
within the bodies of Plants and animals,
in which plants transform the simple juice of mere water
and earth into a proper part of oily matter. Animals,
although oily foods (such as food and drink) constitute
the greatest portion of fat and flesh, nevertheless assimilate
watery drink to some extent, etc. But this twofold
conversion of water into oil (namely, from mixture
and assimilation) is accomplished through various windings
of passages and concoctions, and by heat continued calmly
and over a long lapse of time.
    357. The third [instance] is in the rudiment of putrefac-
tion, as in corrupted water and the dregs
of distilled waters; both of which obtain a certain degree
of fatness and oil.
    358. The fourth [instance] is in the sweetening of certain
metals, such as Sugar of Saturn, etc.
    359. The change of water into a more oily substance
occurs by digestion; for oil is nothing but digested water.
And this digestion occurs by heat, which is either external
or internal. Again, by provocation or exci-
                                        tation

--- Page 265 ---
...tation, it could occur when an oily or digested body is mixed in, whose nature will embrace the rest by some participation of its own. Digestion is also made effective by directly assimilating crude substances to bodies entirely digested, as happens in plants and animals, whose nourishment is cruder for the bodies to be nourished. But, as has been said, this digestion is a long process. We will more fully pursue the treatise on that twofold principle (of profound speculation in natural philosophy) when we shall have arrived at the section on the transformation of bodies; content now with what has been presented as a sample. And there are places where, it will not be denied, matters pertaining to the same subject will be taught, in the chapter on the first congregations of matter. Here is depicted a certain supreme assembly of orders, prescribing a law for all bodies.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*Chameleons.*

360. A chameleon is almost the size of a common lizard, with a head not proportionate to its size, and huge eyes. It moves its head with its neck unmoved; its neck, I know not how, does not bend, as happens to pigs. Its back is curved, its skin sprinkled with tubercles, which are less prominent towards the abdomen. Its tail is slender and long.
K 3

--- Page 266 ---
222 OF FRANCIS BACON
long. On each foot there are five toes, three extended outwards, two drawn inwards; its tongue, of admirable length compared to the rest of its body, having a cavity at its tip, is put forth for catching flies. Its color is green and yellowish, shining more with whiteness towards the abdomen, yet interspersed with blue, white, and red spots. Placed on things colored green, it becomes green, the other colors as if extinguished. It becomes yellow when brought near yellow; but near blue, red, or white, only the spots shine with a deep green. From contact with black, it becomes black, with a mixture of green intervening. It is not fed by air alone (though it is its principal food), since it also feeds on captured flies (as we have said). There were some, however, who, having kept it for a whole year, denied they had been able to perceive what had served as nourishment for it besides air. It is to be noted that when air is drawn in, its belly swells and its jaws close, which the rays of the sun, when turned towards it, usually open. It is a foolish tradition of magic that storms will arise from a chameleon burned on the tops of houses (these things are fashioned from dreams of sympathy), for since it feeds on air, it is believed to possess great power for generating an impression in the air.
                                                                    Expe-

--- Page 267 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 223
A Solitary Experiment concerning
subterranean fires.

361. Some ancient writer relates that in a certain region of Media, flames erupt from the plain, which he denies are pure, or enveloped in an abundance of belched smoke, ashes, or pumice, such as mountain caverns vomit forth. The definite reason is that the flames lack compression, as in mountains, or in earthquakes that become fiery even to the ejection of flames. And hidden fires manifest themselves, unaware how to flame up, and finally bursting forth when oil is poured on them. The reason is that the fire seems so suffocated that it cannot remove a stone, and it is heat rather than flame, yet sufficient for igniting oil.

A Solitary Experiment concerning
nitre.

362. It is recorded that water in some lakes is found so nitrous that clothes thrown into it are spontaneously cleansed of adhering dirt, but if kept there longer, they are reduced to ashes. The purgative power of nitre is all the more noteworthy, the colder the body (of water) is, since it is known that warm water cleanses better than cold. But the reason is, the spirits in
K 4                                    co.

--- Page 268 ---
224 FRANCIS BACON'S
its subtlety, which separates and divides whatever viscous and dirty matter adheres to the body.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
           *the congelation of air.*

   363. Take the largest bladder you can, fill it with air, bind it around the neck with a waxed silk thread, and moreover, seal it very tightly with a thick wax stopper, so that even if the neck of the bladder dries out, air is prevented from entering and exiting. Then bury it four or five feet deep in the earth, in a vault or a snow cellar, so that snow is excavated around the bladder: and after a period of fourteen days, see if it has contracted. If this happens, it appears from the surrounding cold of the earth or snow that the air has condensed, and has become more like water. The efficacy of this experiment is wide.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
     *the congelation of water into crystal.*

   364. They report in good faith that in inner caverns, hanging crystal is found, and that a dripping from the rudiments of crystal occurs onto it. In some other places, but more rarely, it is said to originate from below. Although of cold

--- Page 269 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 225
Although it is effected by cold, it could nevertheless happen that water, insinuating itself into the earth, may acquire a more viscous nature, and one more apt for congelation, and may acquire a solidity of which water by its own nature is not capable. Therefore, let an experiment be performed, and let a large heap of earth be placed into the hollow of a vessel, at a time of intense frost; let hemp be interposed, lest it reach the bottom; then let that quantity of water be poured over it which can percolate. Let it be examined afterwards whether at the bottom ice harder than usual and more difficult to dissolve is found. I also believe that if the earth, from top to bottom, by gradually narrowing, converges into that form which an inverted [a] pointed mass of sugar reduced to a small amount forms, the experiment can be furthered. For the ice, if it has drained out anywhere, will become [b] less in bulk, a small quantity assisting the transformation.

A single experiment regarding the preservation both of the color and the odor in rose leaves.

365. Take the plucked petals of Damask roses, which you should dry on the housetop upon lead in the sun on a clear day,
K 5 hora

a] Sugar Loafe Reverſed.
b] leſse in Bulke.

--- Page 270 ---
226 OF FRANCIS BACON
only between the second and twelfth hour, or thereabouts. Insert the dried (leaves) into an earthenware flask of good odor and not damp, or into a glass with a narrow mouth. Press them more tightly, but so that bruising is absent. Seal the flask or glass tightly. With these roses, not only the odor, but also the color, will remain fresh; for at least the space of a year. It is to be observed that nothing is equally harmful to plants or other bodies destined to perish either by putrefaction or by desiccation, as adventitious moisture, which occupies the loose spaces of bodies, unless it is extracted. For it draws out the innate and radical moisture as its companion in its departure. Hence, a more moderate sweat preserves the sap of an animated body. *Note*, that when roses are removed from insolation, there are no or only moderate remnants of their primitive odor; so much so that it is a secondary odor that supervenes upon the native one.

   *Various experiments concerning the con-*
         *tinuation of flame.*

   366.

--- Page 271 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 227
& less. Therefore, we will dwell longer on
bodies susceptible to combustion,
as far as their entire mass and immediately,
without a wick, so that the combustion may be more diffuse.
A spoon full of spirit of wine,
and moderately heated, burned for a space of 116
arterial pulses. The same quantity of spirit
of wine mixed with a sixth part of a spoon-full of nitre
blazed while 94 pulses were counted.
With an equal quantity of black salt
up to 83 pulses; with an equal quantity
of gunpowder, which dissolves in
black water, up to 110 pulses completed.
A cube or ball of yellow wax, to half
the quantity of spirit of wine, and
placed in the middle, only for a space
of 87 pulses; mixed with a sixth part
of a spoon-full of milk, it burned for a space of 100
pulses, the milk having coagulated; mixed
with a sixth part of a spoon-full of water, for
a space of 86 pulses; but with an equal quan-
tity of water, only for a space of 4 pulses.
A small stone was placed in the middle,
and the spirit of wine burned up to 94 pulses.
With a splinter of wood, which equaled the
thickness of an arrow and almost the length of a
finger, occupying the middle, the spirit
of wine exhausted 94 arterial moments.
So that the spirit of wine surpassed the others in duration.

--- Page 272 ---
228 FRANCIS BACON'S
surpassed others, and spirit of wine with black salt, and an equal quantity of water, had the shortest burning time compared to the rest.
	367. It deserves exact observation, whether the swiftness of flashing in the flame is more from a vivid flame, or from the contrary effort of the admixed body, fleeing the conception of fire. The quantity of spirit of wine remaining after the extinction of the flame will prove this, and will clearly show the former to be the cause, since the mixture of the substance which is involved in combustion renders the extinction very swift. It should be noted incidentally, that spirit of wine no longer conceives flame, once it has spontaneously evaporated, nor does it offer the same acrimony to the taste that it possessed before. But neither does it turn sour, with any proximity to vinegar, which happens to burnt wine, but it is of a dull and dead taste.
	368. It should be noted, in the said experiment with wax, that the wax is dissolved by fire, so that it cannot, not forming a single body with the spirit of wine, issue forth into one and the same flame, which (flame) withdraws itself from the flowing wax, until, by too much wandering dispersion, it claims the whole space, and extinguishes the flame.
	369. From the experiment of the mixture of inflamed spirit of wine, things are light-bearing, not fruit-
					bearing,

--- Page 273 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 229
productive, now we will treat of the continuation of flame,
such as candles, lamps, wax-lights exhibit,
from flammable material, and a wick provoking
inflammation. Nor do these serve for illumination only,
but prove themselves by use and convenience;
for these lights bring great advantage for economy,
if they could be prepared so that they might contend
with others in light and beauty, and also excel in duration.
Simple wax formed into a candle, and various
mixtures of wax with candle material,
with additions to be enumerated individually, namely,
common water, spirit of wine, milk, black salt,
oil, butter, niter, sulfur, iron filings,
so that each of these makes up a sixth part
with respect to the wax; and any of these candles
from that mixture, having a weight and wick
equal to pure wax by just measure,
gave the following experiment of combustion and duration: the
fastest consumption was of that formed from iron
filings, good at first in light, until the iron filings,
having consumed part of the candle, collected around
the wick: which done, the wick, elongated and thick,
diminished the light of the candle;
which we saw melt in half the time,
compared to simple wax. In speed of consumption, next to
                                                                    this

--- Page 274 ---
230 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OF FRANCIS BACON
to this came oil and butter, exceeding pure
wax in speed by a fifth part. Pure wax
obtained the third degree of speed in consumption;
then black salt, surpassing pure wax by approximately
an eighth part of its duration. There followed
milk and common water with little difference in respect
to aqua vitae, but water [burned] very slowly. In
the last four, the wick will spit out sparks.
As for nitre, it will not shine beyond twelve
pulses, with particles of flame being ejected in the meantime,
afterwards turning into vapors. Sulphur will almost
equal nitre in duration of light, but a little later
it hardens, and adheres to the wick like a crust;
so that the mixture of black salt with wax
surpassed [pure wax] by an eighth part of its duration,
and water by a fifth.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;370. After experiments varied according to
materials, the curiosity of the experiment turned
to the diversity of the wick; in which are included
common cotton, sewing threads, rush,
silk, straw, and wood. These three
latter will moderately catch fire, but are extinguished
when the wax takes hold of the flame. Of
the three former, thread is consumed more slowly
than cotton, and indeed by a sixth part of the time.
The next place is due to cotton.
The consumption of rush is slower than cotton,
by at least a third part of the time. Equal

--- Page 275 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 231
the flame of cotton and of thread almost proportionally thickens,
which (flame) is both smaller and darker in a
rush. Let it be investigated whether wood
and wick, as in torches, are consumed more
slowly than a simple wick.

371. Hitherto the diversity of material and wick
has been considered; but also the quality of the material
contributes to the flame's duration, if it has been
hard, soft, old, new, etc. Thrifty housewives, so that candles
may burn longer, are accustomed to place them separately in bran
or flowers so that they may harden, and swift
consumption may be prevented, since they achieve twice
the period of duration, if compared with other candles
of the same material; bran and flowers having the power
of hardening, so much so that the age and use
of bran may add to the duration. It is also known
that wax candles last longer than tallow candles,
because wax is firmer and harder.

372. The longevity of the flame is longer
where the attraction of nourishment is easier, as is
seen in the hall of the King of England in a light,
whose all-night [a] service it is, whence also
its name, like a large cake made from wax,
and having a wick placed in the middle.
Whence it results that more nourishment approaches
the wick from afar.

a] there is a Seruice vvhich they call All-night.

--- Page 276 ---
232    OF FRANCIS BACON
then. The flame of lamps also lives longer, because the vessels are wider than the width of a wax or tallow candle.
    373. Take a tin lamp shaped like a small turret, fashioned into a square form. The height of the turret should be three times greater than the length of the lower part, on which the lamp stands. Let a single hole be made in the lower part, as far as possible from the turret. Invert it, and fill it with oil through that hole, then set it upright. Insert the wick into the hole and light it. You will find it burns slowly and only after a long time. The reason is as stated before, namely, because the flame is nourished from afar. You will also see that as the oil is consumed and descends, the top of the turret is gradually filled with air, the oil being thinned, no doubt, by the heat. Nor would it be unworthy of observation to explore whether, if a hole were made in the top of the turret, when the oil is almost consumed, the air formed from the oil, when a candle flame is applied to it as it is emitted, would catch fire. It would also be expedient to prepare a lamp not of tin but of glass, so that you may see how the vapor or air gradually collects at the top.
    374. The fifth method of prolonging the life of a flame is the confinement of the air in which the flame burns. For we see a candle agi-

--- Page 277 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 233
exposed to agitation, to melt slowly, and to last
longer in lanterns than in the open.
They also report that lamps and candles have burned for a very
long time in caves and tombs.

375. The fifth way of aiding duration
lies in the nature of the air in which the candle
burns, whether it is hot or cold, humid
or dry. Cold air irritates the flame,
and causes it to burn more fiercely (as fire is
more vehement in frost), and thus accelerates
consumption. Air once heated (in my
opinion) makes the flame gentler
and favors its continuation. Dry air
is indifferent; humid air in some way extinguishes the
flame, as is evident in lights extinguished by
mine vapors. Be that as it may,
it at least creates a weaker light, and for that
reason, an aid to continuation is provided.

*Various experiments concerning burials*
*and infusions of various bodies under the earth.*

376. Burials under the earth provide
considerable use for the preservation,
condensation, and hardening of bodies.
That method of burying which does not prevent
contact with the earth serves for condensation and hardening;
and it is customarily used in the art
of preparing porcelain vessels, etc. Nor
dissimilar

--- Page 278 ---
234          FRANCISCI BACONI
Nor is the method dissimilar; a similar method is
used for preserving hard and solid bodies, such as
clay, wood, etc. But if you act so that bodies, by being
preserved, may soften and become tender, the other of
these [methods] must be tried: that, stored in cases,
they cannot touch the earth, or, built into an arched
structure, the earth may overhang them but not
touch them. If this happens, decay will follow from
humidity rather than that they be preserved by the
cold virtue of the earth insinuating itself, unless
the earth is both of extreme dryness and sandy.
     377. An orange, a lemon, and a common
apple, wrapped in linen and buried for a space of
14 days under the earth, at a depth of four
feet, in a place however humid, and with a rainy
sky, we took out uncorrupted and not
moldy, but which had hardened a little more than
usual, with a color otherwise lively, but a faded
taste. Detained there beyond the said period of
time, they showed the beginning of decay.
     378. Of beer buried in a full bottle,
as [a] before, the taste was more lively and clearer.
The same happened to a bottle containing wine,
and also of vinegar, similarly buried in a bottle,
there was greater liveliness and fragrance, with a
taste almost resembling violets. After a full
month, those three from their hiding place—

     [a] Experiment. 315.

--- Page 279 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 235**
from their storage were offered, with their vigor and vivacity
entirely unimpaired, if not improved.
379. It would be a fruitful experi-
ment, if oranges, lemons, and pomegranates could be preserved until
summer, at which time they would be of any price. One might try
placing them in a tightly closed jar or pot, lest any humidity from the
earth penetrate, or by storing them in a snow-house. And in general,
I state that he who is about to apply himself to exploring the effects
of cold needs three aids: a snow-pit or snow-
chest, an arched underground space twenty feet deep, and also a deep
well.
380. They say that gems, corals, and jas-
per recover their lost color underground. Truly of wonderful benefit,
if the success corresponds. But for those buried for six weeks, the
result was lacking; it would be expedient to try that in the depth of a
well, or in a snow-
house, where the cold is more intense, and thus the power of uniting
the body is greater, whence the splendor is less diluted.
A solitary experiment regarding the ef-
fects on the human body from various winds.
381. When the South wind blows, the human body
languishes, and, having conceived a torpor, it becomes sluggish
to

--- Page 280 ---
236           FRANCIS BACON
causing an effect contrary to that of the North wind. The reason is, because the former wind renders the humors as if liquid and fluid, so that the parts, by weighing down, become heavy, as wood and other things teach us, which the South wind makes swell. Moreover, the movement and agility of the body chiefly consist in the nerves, which the South wind relaxes more.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
        *Summer and Winter Diseases.*

   382. It is commonly known that more people sicken in summer, and more die in winter; unless a plague is raging, which usually invades summer or autumn. The reason is, because heat, for the most part, gives origin to diseases, which are mostly cured by sweats and purges, the summer season being conducive to this; and they are more easily provoked. As for pestilential diseases, the reason why most die in summer is this: because that season of the year is most fertile for generating them. Otherwise, for those seized by such a plague in winter, the fear of immediate danger is not lacking.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
        *Pestilential Seasons.*

   383. It is a popular opinion that in hot and humid years—

--- Page 281 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 237
...and humid years usually contain something from which they are suspected of generating plague, this with the weak argument that putrefaction draws its origin from heat and humidity. In England, this belief struggles, since through many summers remarkable for dryness, that plague has reigned with the greatest destruction. The reason perhaps is that dryness in the bodies of Islanders, accustomed to a humid air, exasperates the humors and inclines them more to putrefaction or inflammation. Besides, it usually infects waters and renders them less healthy. Add that in Mauritania plagues rage in the summer months, with a hot and dry climate.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning a popular error about Epidemic diseases.*

384. For many diseases, both Epidemic and others, there is their own and proper time for manifesting. This is falsely attributed to the constitution of the air during that time, when the cause lies hidden in the circuit of the preceding time having unfolded into it, and in the series connecting the seasons of the year. Therefore Hippocrates in his prognostics has good observations of diseases which testify to the nature of past time.

Expe-

--- Page 282 ---
238 FRANCIS BACON

*A Solitary Experiment concerning the alte-*
*ration and preservation of liquids*
*in deep wells and vaults.*

385. We carefully sealed earthenware bottles,
and suspended them in a well at least
twenty cubits deep. Others we sub-
merged below the water, some above the
water, removed from its surface by the measure
of a cubit. The liquids chosen for this experi-
ment were beer, not fresh, but fit for
drinking, wine, and milk, with the
following success. The beer and wine above and
below the water had not entirely deteriorated, but
their goodness and maturity were superior
to that in bottles with the same drink kept
in a cellar. But if you compared them among
themselves, those suspended above the water
were undoubtedly superior; and that beer
was slightly effervescent, not so much that
which had lain beneath the water's surface,
yet it was lively nonetheless. The milk
turned sour, verging on putrefaction. Never-
theless, there is a village near Blois where
they allow milk to curdle in deep caves, and
indeed of a most pleasing taste. On this
occasion, I decided to try it with milk suspended
in the well; but the outcome failed. I do not
know, however, whether the Blois milk is
first boiled. Therefore, it could be tried
with boiled milk, and its cream,
                                        with

--- Page 283 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 239
since that body is, of course, by its nature composed of cream, curd, and whey, so that change and dissolution are easy.
Nor would it hurt to make an experiment with beer whose liquor is not yet cooked, so that it may become clear whether suspension in a well accelerates its maturation and clarification.

Experimentum solitarium spectans
[a] Hæsitantiam.

386. It is known that many are stutterers. The cause perhaps could be a cooling of the tongue, from which comes a slowness of natural movement. And therefore we observe that delirious people usually stammer, and stutterers also, after drinking a moderate amount of wine, stammer less, because it warms them up. Nor is it hidden from us that stutterers stumble more with hesitation at the beginning of speech than in its progress, the tongue, of course, warming up a little through movement. In some, however, the cause may perhaps have been (though rarely) dryness of the tongue, an equal impediment to movement, with coldness, a common affliction for wise and distinguished men, such as Moses, a man of impeded tongue. Very many stutterers are found to be very choleric, with choler inducing dryness of the tongue.

Expe-

a] Stutting.

--- Page 284 ---
240      FRANCIS BACON'S

*Various Experiments concerning Odors.*

389. The fragrance of odors is greater in free air and
from a moderate distance than
if they are brought to the nose, as previous [experiments] elsewhere
have shown; the reason is twofold: first, a more
subtle mixture or incorporation of the odor.
Thus, sounds are most pleasing to the ears if
any part, being separate and distinct, does not strike the
sense. Second, because all fragrance consists of and is
carried by crude and earthy odors mixed in.
From a distance, a sweetness is achieved,
which comes from a greater spirituality, abandoning
whatever earthy [elements] it carried in its company.
388. Crushing reduces the sweetness of odor
latent in dry substances to its maximum
vigor. Thus, pricked rinds of
oranges and lemons render them more fragrant.
In general, motion and agitation elicit
fragrance from bodies, even those not crushed,
as when a perfumed sachet is shaken.
The reason is twofold: first, a more copious
effluvium of spirits, their exit being facilitated
by crushing, pricking, compression, and to some extent, by
movement; the latter includes the other,
namely the impulse of air, thence a bent vehicle of odor.
389. Plants produce the greatest delights
of odors in flowers, whose [other parts are] entirely
                                odorless.

--- Page 285 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 241
the leaves are entirely, as in violets, roses,
pellitory, carnations, veronica, honeysuckle,
the flower of the vine, apple, citrus, beans, &c.
The reason is, that wherever the heat and vigor
of the plant suffices by insinuating odor into the
leaves, there the flower is of a faint and evanescent odor
compared to the leaves, as can be seen in rosemary
and lavender flowers, and dog roses. If
the heat is not strong, the plant's spirit exists
digested and attenuated, as if by applying a separator
of cruder sap where it begins to flower, not before.
390. Most odors smell best
when plucked or bruised, as said; but when pressed
or struck, they lose the vigor of their fragrance;
the reason is, because compression elicits a coarser
and more earthy spirit in the company of the more subtle,
and confuses it, whereas in those
which diffuse a sharper odor from themselves, such
a degree in the emission of odor is not given.

--- Page 286 ---
242          OF FRANCIS BACON
it may make; and it is considered best for its lightness.
   392. Secondly, by boiling over an evenly constructed fire, and that is to be preferred whose consumption is more rapid.
   393. Thirdly, observe in different flasks, or open vessels, otherwise equal among themselves, which keeps away foulness longest and remains uncorrupted; this is to be preferred over others.
   394. Fourthly, make an experiment in the preparation of a stronger or weaker drink, with the same quantity of malt added in both cases. And it will be entirely permissible to conclude that the water is more concocted and nutritious from which a more generous drink is made; although for medicinal uses, that water will be rejected. Such water is usually supplied by large rivers accustomed to navigation, and also by large and pure ponds; the efficacy of the sun reigns more here than in narrower springs and rivers. I would assign the next place in goodness after this to chalky water, for preparing a drink from it. It also benefits concoction if it is drawn from a deep well, specifically for removing the crudities of the water. But chalky water near the surface of the earth is too corrosive, as appears in the washing of clothes, which the use of such water gradually eats away.
                                        395. Fifth-

--- Page 287 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 243
395. Fifthly, housewives distin-
guish waters by the fact that to some soap is ap-
plied, to others not. It is probable that richer
water will best of all admit soap,
since thin water, by diluting, removes the unctuous
nature of soap.
396. Sixthly, one may judge waters from the
nature of the places whence they arise and spring
forth. Rainwater is highly esteemed by physicians,
on account of its lightness; however, they say it
putrefies most easily, perhaps due to the thinness of its
volatile components. In receptacles for rainwater
(such as exist among the Venetians, etc.), it is of
worse quality, perhaps because, being covered above,
they exclude the sun. Snow water is considered
unhealthy; so much so that people living at the
foot of snow-covered mountains, or in
ascending (women especially), from drinking
snow water, develop a prominent swelling of the throat.
Well water, unless from a chalky bottom,
or a copious spring, renders food un-
cooked in it red, an altogether bad sign.
Springs on the tops of high hills are the best, since such
water exhibits lightness by its tendency to as-
cend, and is moreover purest and un-
mixed, and duly filtered through a vast tract of earth
it has traversed. For the waters of valleys, any other
waters and those collected flow together underground to the same place
L 2
per-

--- Page 288 ---
244        FRANCIS OF BACON
admit a plumb line; these, bursting forth on mountain
tops, pass through a very large part of pure
earth, carrying far less foreign moisture.
    397. Seventh, waters also from the soil, from a flowing
channel, are judged, and commend themselves by their pu-
rity and taste which flow through pebbles.
Next in value to these is water conveyed through chan-
nels solidified with clay. Third is chalky,
fourth is sandy, the worst of all
is muddy. Nor should one trust those whose sweet
taste, as they are mostly found at the
bottom of the slopes of large cities, necessarily
collecting many impurities.

    *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
        *temperate heat under the Equi-*
                *noctial.*

    398. In Peru, and other parts of the West
Indies, although under the line (equator), the heat
is not so intolerable as in Mauritania
and regions subject to the Torrid Zone.
The cause is *the great Brizes* which movement
of air in larger circles (such as are in
the zones of the world) produces, whence cooling.
Nor therefore is the midday heat so great
when *the Brizes are great*, as around
the ninth or tenth hour before noon.
Another cause is, the longi-
                                            tude

--- Page 289 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 245
length of nights, by which the dew is accustomed to compensate for the inconveniences of daily heat. A third cause is the Sun's stay, not with respect to day and night (for I have spoken of these before), but to the season of the year. For the Sun's passage in its oblique course along the line doubles summer and winter, whereas in the regions of the Torrid Zone it doubles and recedes, and thus makes one long summer.

  *A Solitary Observation concerning*
    *the dark color in Ethiopians.*

  399. The heat of the Sun dyes men in certain places with a blackish color, as in Ethiopia, Guinea, etc. That this is not an effect of fire, glassmakers show, who are constantly occupied with fire. The reason perhaps is that fire acts upon the spirits and blood, so that they evaporate, and thus renders men pale and swarthy. But the more benign heat of the Sun only draws the blood to the outermost parts of the body, and rather digests it than liquefies it. Hence all Ethiopians are of a fleshy indeed but ill-proportioned bodily build, and with thick lips, which indicate moisture retained, not drawn out. We also see them born in regions abundant in water because of rivers and other causes. For Meroë, the metro-
               L 3           polis

--- Page 290 ---
246          OF FRANCIS BACON
polis sits by a large lake. Congo also,
where Ethiopians are found, abounds in
waters, and the region around Cape Verde is humid,
and therefore susceptible to plague. The regions of the
Abyssinians, Mauretania, and Peru,
whose inhabitants are tinted a tawny and olive
color, and pale, are everywhere sandy and
dry. As for the Ethiopians, just as they are of a
muscular and abnormal body habit,
so perhaps they are also sanguine and of a reddish
color internally, were it not that their blackish outer skin would obstruct the view.

*Solitary Experiment concerning mo-*
*tion a very few moments after death.*

400. Certain animals, decapitated,
move for some time, like birds; for a
very short time, man, and all beasts.
Certain creatures show motion when their body is cut into various
parts, like snakes, eels,
worms, flies, etc. Firstly, therefore, it is established
that the immediate cause of death is the dis-
solution or extinction of the spirits, the destruction
or corruption of the organs being mediate.
However, certain organs are so absolutely
necessary that their destruction is immediately
followed by the extinction of the spirits, with the
intervention of the shortest possible time. A certain
classical writer among the ancients, neither
                                        suspect-

--- Page 291 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IV. 247
of doubtful credibility reports that a bellowing was heard from a beast slaughtered for sacrifice, even after its heart was removed. Of similar authority is this account, that with a piglet's head opened, its brain, removed and placed on someone's palm, palpitated, with no part of the brain injured, and without separation from the spinal cord. Throughout this entire period, the piglet appeared dead and was devoid of all movement. A little later, with the brain replaced and the piglet's skull closed, it walked about a little. Nor is it unknown that when an eye is gouged out by the law of retaliation, it may hang for some time by the optic nerve, deprived of the power of sight during that time, but a little later, by restoration, the act of seeing returned. Therefore, the spirits are contained primarily in the head and ventricles of the brain, which both man and beast have large and capacious, so that when the head is dissected, they move little or not at all. But the heads of birds are very small, and therefore the spirits are more dispersed through the nerves, whence movement in them is a little more prolonged. So much so that Histories have recorded that a Roman Emperor, to demonstrate his skill in shooting, aimed a huge bifurcated arrow at an Ostrich as it swiftly crossed the Theater, and took off its head; and with the head removed, it nevertheless
                               L 4                      continued

--- Page 292 ---
248          OF FRANCIS BACON
nevertheless continued its course for a short time.
Worms, flies, eels have spirits dispersed
throughout their entire body, so that the movement
of even their separated parts is felt.

          *End of the Fourth Century of the Natural*
                    *History.*

________________________________________

     OF FRANCIS BACON
          OF VERULAM
NATURAL
     HISTORY
CENTURY FIVE.

*Various Experiments concerning accelerated*
     *germination.*

[Decorative initial T] *Let the inquiry pass to plants and vegeta-*
*bles, and that not perfunctory, inasmuch as they are*
*to be occupied with the principal works of the third day.*
*Concerning these, first stands out that saying "Let it bring*
*forth," a genuine character of animation, since other words*
*merely designate essence. And there is also an excellent*
*and especially widespread use, extending through the method*
*of nourishment, Medicine, and not just one kind of mechanical*
*art.*

     401. We ordered a small plot to be sown with turnip
                                        seed.

--- Page 293 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 249
of turnips, radishes, cucumbers, wheat,
and peas; and we gave it the name of a [a] hot-
bed, prepared in this manner. Let horse
dung be used, old, well rotted, and it was
spread in a mound half a foot high,
supported on all sides by boards;
upon the surface of which earth, sifted
through a sieve, was cast, to a depth of
two fingers. Upon it was sprinkled seed
soaked for an entire night in water mixed
with cow dung. Turnip seed and wheat
grew within the space of two days to half
an inch, without the aid of irrigation. The
rest emerged on the third day. We made
the experiment in the month of October,
the air of springtime perhaps being likely
to accelerate maturation. That is excellent,
and it shines forth from it that, without
these aids, germination would have been
four times slower. But nothing here
presents itself as proving of any advantage,
unless in bearing peas, the early yield of
which is invaluable. Let the experiment be
transferred to cherries, grains, and other
similar fruits of great value from hastened
maturation.
402. We soaked wheat in water
mixed with cow dung, another portion mixed
with horse dung, another in water mixed
with human dung,
                                  L 5                      co-

a] Hot-Bed.

--- Page 294 ---
250      OF FRANCIS BACON
pigeon dung, another in urine, another with added
chalk reduced to powder, another with added soot,
another with ashes, another with added black salt,
another in reddish wine, another in Malmsey,
another in spirit of wine. The proportion of water,
to the other constituents forming this mixture, was quadruple;
only an eighth part of salt was mixed in. Urine, wines,
and spirit of wine were simple and without water. We gave
twelve hours to the maceration. The season
of the year was October. We also sowed another
wheat not macerated, but irrigated twice a day with hot water.
Another likewise, simple in respect to the others (untreated). The success was
as follows: Those seeds mixed with dung, urine, soot,
chalk, ashes, salt, grew within
six days; which afterwards excelled
in height, thickness, and beauty, and
were in this order: urine, then dung,
chalk, soot, ashes, salt, simple wheat
neither macerated nor irrigated; then wheat irrigated
twice daily with hot water, reddish wine.
For these three latter ones there was a slowness of growth
below common wheat sown by itself, and this cultivation
rather harmed than benefited. Those macerated in
Malmsey wine and spirit of wine absolutely
did not grow. That experiment
was quite fruitful, with mostly slight
                                ræque

--- Page 295 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. *Cent. V.* 251

...and that most macerations are worth the cost, and the abundance of the yield creates great hope of profit, if through hastened maturity nothing is lost from the proven nature of what is to be macerated; which does not seem likely, since the cause of both is the vigor of the seed, as can be partly gathered from the preceding.

Something similar could be attempted in other grains, seeds, kernels, for some of which, perhaps, maceration might be more suitable.

The same might be explored with macerated roots, as before, but with an increase in time; and with the investigation recurring with the various seasons of the year, among which, special consideration should be given to spring.

403. Strawberries irrigated (with irrigation intervals spaced by three days) with water that has macerated sheep and pigeon dung will anticipate maturity. It seems probable that the same effect will occur in other berries, herbs, flowers, grains, and trees. Therefore, although the experiment with strawberries was taken from common practice, it has not yet come into general use and is to be applied to many things. For it is common to correct the soil with manure, as well as to restore it by applying dung to the roots. But water that has macerated manure, which seems to be of greater efficacy, has not yet been received into popular use.

L 6 404. Ster-

--- Page 296 ---
252      FRANCIS BACON
404. Dung, chalk, or blood, when applied opportunely to the roots of trees, will make their fruits ripen early. But to apply the same to herbs, not mixed with earth or water, might perhaps seem to be an aid of excessive heat.
405. What we have premised concerning growth has as its cause either good and effective nourishment, or spirits in plants strengthened and excited by attracting better nourishment. For strengthening the spirits in them, we mention the following, which are not, however, to be applied to the roots of trees or to seed. Trees planted in a warm place on a mound, and exposed to the South and East-South-East winds, produce ripe fruits with accelerated growth; and the East-South-East wind is preferred to the South-West wind, although the latter is hotter. But the primary reason is that nocturnal cold succeeds the antemeridian heat; partly also because the Sun radiating from the South-West quarter errs by excess of heat. The planting of them near the outer part of a chimney, which is frequently heated by a fire, promotes the whole work of growth and maturation. Also, to draw back branches to the interior of a place where fire is frequently used, produces the same efficacy. We have an example in vines, of others, exposed to a different part of the sky, maturi-

--- Page 297 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 253**
...turation by a whole month.

406. Besides the twofold reason for maturing more quickly, namely the improvement of nourishment and the strengthening of the spirit, there is a third: that a path may be facilitated for the approaching nourishment. Therefore, moderate digging – namely, the loosening of the earth around the roots of trees, and the transplanting, as it were, of colonies of herbs and flowers into new earth – once every two years (this corresponds to digging, since new earth has a certain looseness) is of the greatest importance for contributing to the success of growth and precocity in plants.

407. But above all others, the acceleration of growth through a more expeditious path for drawing nourishment, which water provides, deserves admiration. A trunk of a Damask rose, with its roots intact, brought into a room with the fire removed, and set up in an earthenware dish which clear and transparent water, with nothing mixed in, fills, remaining half a foot below the water and extending more than two feet above it, in the space of ten days displayed leaves of the most pleasing greenness, and protruding buds, for seven days in complete beauty without any sign of either falling or withering: which beauty afterwards departed from the leaves. But having recently budded, it began to put forth leaves, so that it might unfold into pretty leaves within the course of three months,

--- Page 298 ---
254             OF FRANCIS BACON
was unfolded, until the experiment
was abandoned by our departure. But *it must be noted*
that the leaves had grown somewhat pale, with the color
becoming somewhat white, compared to those in the open air;
then, at the end of October, it had shown its first buds. One may
conjecture that if the season of the year had been spring-like,
they could have been pushed forth more effectively, and perhaps
grown into the maturity of a full flower. Thus,
one might not idly suppose that roses could be placed in the middle of a
marsh, supported by some prop. A new and pleasing thing, but of no use.
And so much the more admirable, because a similar trunk
was placed in water mixed with horse dung, to which the water was four times the amount,
and in a whole four-month period (as far as it was possible to
observe) it produced no leaf,
except for a few buds at the beginning, like the
other.
      408. A flower from Belgium with a bulbous root,
at the same time, we placed it under water at a depth
of two or three digits, which germinated within seven days,
with continuous, albeit slight, growth.
Similarly, the root of beet, borage,
radish was kept under water, with the leaves cut off up to that point,
which beautifully leafed out within six months,
remaining in that state until November.
      409. An

--- Page 299 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 255
conduce to acquiring the speed of germinating and ripening; one of which [advantages arises] from the great value of these things, if they are pre-cooked, the other from the combined good fortune of repeated yield: for land endowed with acquired virtue will produce a radish in the space of a month, which other land left to itself will scarcely give within two months, so that the yield can be doubled.

410. Wheat also, placed in water, did not grow at all, so that a certain efficacy and solidity of the body to be placed in water seems to be required. Roots have this; since the cold of water kills grains and seeds. But wheat accidentally placed in a dish, lightly imbued with moisture exuded through the dishes, which within six weeks (as we said before) appeared moldy, grew to the length of half a finger.

411. From these instances concerning water, it is clear that its parts for nourishment are principal: that the earth provides for the plant both that it may be erect and safe against the injury of heat and cold, by an experiment profitable to drinkers; whence our opinion also, stated previously, receives strength, that drink incorporated into flesh and roots (as beer proves, in which a capon is minced) nourishes more easily,

--- Page 300 ---
256          FRANCISCI BACONI
nourishes, than food and drink taken by themselves.
     412. Plants kept under cover (as I
indeed conceive) will show rapid ger-
mination, producing flowers and plants during
colder times of the year. And just as we
admit into houses exotic gifts of a warmer
climate, such as citrus fruits,
oranges, myrtles, so that the inconveniences
of an unfamiliar air may be warded off;
so too should native plants be nurtured
indoors, so that the success of their growth
may be ensured, and the abundance of produce
yielded at unusual times of the year, and
winter may abound with its own violets,
strawberries, peas; the opportunity for both
bringing in and removing them being duly observed.
Refer this experiment to the strengthening
of the spirit in plants, from the heat, and
branches received within dwellings, etc.
Therefore, the method of accelerating germination
is eightfold in species, threefold in genus.

  *Various experiments concerning the retar-*
          *dation of germination.*

     413. It is a pleasure to give a slower
growth to roses and other flowers, as if by
introducing a delay, since a late rose was
held in great esteem among the ancients.
Indeed, one born in the month of November
enjoys a prerogative of sweetness, as it
exhales less, the sun's heat being less
stimulating. To produce this, the method
                                                            not

--- Page 301 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 257
There is not one [method]; the first is, if the apex is cut off immediately after it has germinated, from which, around November of the same year, with the flower restored, it will bloom; but not exactly at the apex which suffered the iron, but from shoots which were like stolons. The reason is, because the sap, which would otherwise be the nourishment of the apex (even after germination), due to its cutting, by making a diversion to the surrounding lateral shoots, will bear the bloom of a later rose.

414. The second, if you pluck the rose buds where they have swelled into the first nodes. Then the lateral shoots are fruitful. The cause is the same as the preceding one, that the cutting of the apex and the plucking of the buds produce a similar effect, both by retaining the sap for a time, and by diverting it to the shoots which were not growing so much.

415. The third, the removal of certain buds at the top in springtime, leaving the lower ones to grow. The reason is, that branches help to draw the sap more vigorously; for leading it to the top, when trees are pruned, two or three branches should be left there. They say if a shoot is grafted onto a branch of a tree, with some of the old branches cut off, harm follows the new shoots which die.

416. Four-

--- Page 302 ---
258 FRANCIS BACON'S
416. Fourth, to bare the roots around
Christmas for a few days. The reason
is clear, because for some time the ascent
of sap is prevented, and after the hindrance
is removed, if the root is covered by earth
thrown over it, the ascent of sap follows,
but slower.
417. Fifth, to remove the tree from the earth
for several months before it puts forth
buds. The reason is, because after removal,
time is required before, being returned to the
earth, it draws sap, and this time, as it passes,
delays the flowers that are about to be born.
418. Sixth, to delay the grafting of roses
until the month of May, a practice not commonly
used by gardeners before July. And that (the common
practice) only promises fruit in the following year,
whereas this (grafting in May) gives an undoubted
hope in the same year, but of a late bloom.
419. Seventh, to bind the body of the tree
tightly with a string tied around it, which it does
by somewhat retaining the sap, and delaying the
growing tree.
420. Eighth, to plant them in shady places
or near a hedge; the reason is, that the sun is
excluded, from which the ascent of sap is hastened,
and a hedge, predatory for nourishment, looms over it.
These experiments, in as many ways, should be
transferred to other things, both trees and flowers,
with the necessary changes.

421. Opi-

--- Page 303 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 259**

421. Some cherish a specious opinion, namely, that if you graft a late-ripening fruit onto the trunk of an early-ripening tree, the fruit will anticipate in ripeness; as if a peach were grafted onto a cherry tree. And conversely, if a notable shoot bearing early-ripening fruit is grafted onto a stock that ripens later, the adopted shoot will retain its native character, as if a cherry were grafted onto a peach tree. But the authors of this opinion are deluded by empty notions. The reason is that the shoots have dominance over the stock, which behaves passively, neither providing nourishment nor impulse to the shoot.

*Various experiments concerning the ripening of fruits in trees and plants.*

Now we shall proceed to show how to impart to fruits, flowers, and roots a greater abundance of yield and an unusual sweetness, and how to bring about in trees height, size, and, beyond their observed natural character, a hastened precocity. To this inquiry, undoubtedly, much importance will be added from the preceding experiments on accelerating maturity, and the treatise we have in hand will reciprocate mutual illumination with the former, both effects being referred to the increase of vigor in the tree.

--- Page 304 ---
260          OF FRANCIS BACON
ment, but so that, the danger of confusion being avoided,
each may be given its due, where reasons
are more appropriate to one, less to another effect,
they had to be treated separately.
   422. It has been proven by experience that flints, or stones
placed at the roots of a wild tree (such as an oak,
elm, ash, etc.) when piled up, while
it is first planted, cause the usual speed of growth
to be exceeded twofold. The reason is that
the moisture, which comes to the tree from above, is prevented from flowing away,
nor do they allow it to evaporate from the falling heat of the sun.
Then they protect the tree's heat, and ward off cold
winds and frost, as if by an interposed dwelling.
Perhaps also its continuous retention from the beginning contributes something to this.
Let it be inquired whether straw placed around the body of the tree
to a certain height adds a degree of speed.
Although the root is the dispenser of sap, it is drawn to be distributed
throughout the whole body. But *it should be noted* that if stones are applied
to the stem of a lettuce or other softer plant, it is suffocated by too much
moisture, so that it is corroded by worms.
   423. A recently planted tree should not be shaken
until it stands firm on its solidified roots.
Therefore, some enclose trees around the base with two forks,
so that they may grow upright. But after a year has strengthened
                                        the roots,

--- Page 305 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 261
roots, shaking is beneficial, because it loosens the earth and perhaps acts as a kind of exercise and agitation of the sap in the tree.
424. In general, to remove shoots and suckers sprouting from the root and the middle part of the trunk is useful for promoting the height of the tree. On the other hand, to prune and lop the top, so that the trees spread out and grow like a more diffuse thicket, causes this, as is evident in [a] pollards.
425. A method is handed down by which a place may quickly be made woody, and it is this. Let willows, poplars, and alders of seven years' growth be taken, and, stripped to a proper depth, let them be planted obliquely, not upright but bent. Thus, with the roots multiplied, the same trunk will produce more shoots born from itself.
426. If you desire both new and larger roots of fruit-bearing trees, let a dwarf tree be bent down, and cover all its branches, bent towards the ground, with earth piled over them; every shoot will take root. That experiment offers hope of profit in trees which have some value (the branches producing a trunk without expense), such as the apricot, peach, almond, cornelian cherry, mulberry, fig, etc. Si-
                                                              mile

a] Pollards.

--- Page 306 ---
Here's the English translation, preserving the original formatting and paragraph breaks:

262 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; OF FRANCIS BACON
milarly, what usually happens in vineyards, with
[a] musk roses, or those that give off the smell of musk.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 427. From the month of May until July it is permitted
to strip the bark from certain branches of three or
four inches in thickness; and the bared place should
be covered all around with a well-tempered paste of
horse dung, and bound tightly. Then, around the feast
of All Saints, the branch, cut at the stripped place,
should be inserted into the earth, destined to become
a beautiful tree within the space of a year. The reason
may perhaps be that the stripping of the bark prevents
the descent of the sap as winter approaches, and
preserves it in the branch. It may also be that the
paste and horse dung applied to the bared place moisten
and nourish it, so as to make it more suitable for rooting.
*Note*, that there is something here which, generally
observed, namely that sap is retained in the branches,
may be useful elsewhere.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 428. It has been found that beautiful and unfruitful
trees, when their pith is perforated, shed their sterility.
The reason is perhaps that the tree

--- Page 307 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 263
the experiment was, that when two or three of the
principal roots had been split, a small stone should be in-
serted lest the fissure should close up, and the lost
fertility returned; the cause perhaps being, that the root
of the tree can become as it were [a] hide-bound
no less than the trunk; nor will it open when split,
unless something is placed in between.
      430. It is customary to plant trees needing warm
sun on an embankment facing south; of which kind
are the apricot tree, peach, plum, vine, fig, and sim-
ilar ones. The advantage is twofold: one from the
heat of the embankment by reflection, the other from
the exclusion of shade. For if a tree grows into a
round shape, the upper branches shade the lower
ones. If it spreads out on an embankment, it receives
the sun's rays falling from above and below.
      431. It has been found by some through practice, that in a
tree with widely spreading branches, a certain
defoliation is beneficial, so that the striking sun may have easier
access to the branches and fruits. An experiment
undertaken for both profit and curiosity, involving a
tree to be planted on the northern part of an embank-
ment (its small height being extended across the
embankment) and exposed to the Southern part;
those who undertook this thinking that with cold
flowing in from the shade, the root

   a] Hide bound.

--- Page 308 ---
264          FRANCIS BACON
...the root and the lower parts of the tree would enjoy, while the upper branches and fruit would benefit from the Sun. But the outcome disappointed the hope, perhaps for this reason, that the body no less than the root, although subterranean, requires the aid of the Sun; indeed, the lower parts more than the upper, as the coverings of the lowest parts of the tree from surrounding straw show.

     432. The lowness of a fruit-bearing branch makes the fruit larger and riper: for we always observe in apricot, peach, and quince trees on a bank that the fruits hanging towards the lower parts are larger than the others. In Gaul also, vines intended to yield wine grow low, with slender stakes added, around which they are entwined, as supports; and vineyards raised to the height of trees produce only sour grapes. In Italy and other regions experiencing a hotter sun, they are accustomed to being raised on elms and other trees. But I believe that if the French custom of planting low vines were introduced into those lands, they would have both more vigorous and sweeter vines. But because of the supports, it is much more expensive. I would advise trying whether a tree grafted closer to the ground, with only the lower branches retained and the higher ones continuously cut back, would be more fruitful.
                                             433. Co-

--- Page 309 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 265
433. A more abundant yield of the tree
is produced not only by grafting onto tender
shoots, but also onto various branches of an old tree,
a certain hope of great fruitfulness, which diminishes
through grafting onto only a single stock.
434. Nowhere hitherto has the annual
digging around the roots come into use; it would be of great
importance so that the fruit may be both early and better;
applied only to vines, which, if frequently
applied to other trees and shrubs (like roses, &c.),
would add speed to maturity; as I indeed
conceive that matter.
435. It is established that a fruit-bearing tree,
greatly loosened around its roots and then re-
planted, greatly increased the yield of the following year.
No other reason can be given besides the loosening of the soil
beneficial to the tree; deriving the benefit to other things,
outside of fruit-bearing trees, since their
transplantation into new soil is more difficult than that of
flowers and herbs.
406. The vitality of a dead tree is revived by

--- Page 310 ---
266          OF FRANCIS BACON
            it aids renovation; especially if not
only it has been better, but also if the change
has made it distinct from the former.
   437. An herb cut from its roots, and the earth
afterwards to be trodden down more firmly, and
to be pressed down by the work of foot and hoe, when planted
under the first cold of winter, grows out with roots
immensely increased in summer. The reason
is that moisture, being prevented from pervading the inner
parts of the plant, remains longer in the root
and expands it. It is also customary for gardeners,
after onions and turnips, etc., have been committed to the earth,
to press down the looser earth by treading.
   438. Millet applied to the lowest part of the root
will make it grow very thick; the reason is that,
since it is of a spongy substance, the earth sucks out the moisture,
the root's nourishment. This is of great use for onions,
turnips, and yellow parsnips.
   439. The sifting of earth improves both the tree and
the fruit, with this caution observed:
that since all things thrive more prosperously
when a transfer to something better occurs, it is necessary that the
stocks adhere to a more barren earth than that
to which the transplants go. Thus those who give their attention to
fattening cattle are accustomed to always lead them into richer
pastures. Thus the solidity of the body in youth
                                             prolon-

--- Page 311 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 267
-longation, for the care of which is expected from age. Moreover, in exercises it is advantageous to begin with more difficult things, as in dancing to use heavier shoes, etc.
440. It has been observed that cutting tree barks, both vertically and horizontally, so that the incision appears as a fissure rather than continuous, has been beneficial, both to prevent the trees themselves from becoming hidebound, and to remove moss.
441. For some plants, shade rather than sun helps, so that they grow more luxuriantly and abundantly, which strawberries and laurels, etc., demonstrate. Therefore, borage seed should be sown among strawberries, under whose leaves more (strawberries) are found than elsewhere. Laurels to be planted should be turned towards the North, or continually protect them from the sun by frequently opposing it. If you sow strawberries, do not clear their beds of useless weeds during the first half-year, inasmuch as they provide shade.
442. So that the growth of plants may be increased, it must be considered not only the increase of vigor in the soil or plant, but also that what would otherwise be consumed is preserved. Thus, a wheat planting was recently attempted, but abandoned due to troubles and labors. Yet it is true that much is preserved by planting, if you consider what has been sown,
M 2

--- Page 312 ---
268 FRANCIS OF BACON
cias, both so that it does not yield as prey to birds, and so that its low-lying position may be avoided, which causes the sown plants not to take root.
   443. Some of the ancients prescribed that small trees, on which a fig or other fruit grows, while it is still immature, should be covered with dung around mid-autumn until the time of spring, and when the sky then warms up, they should be transferred into good earth to be planted anew. In this way, the tree of the previous year will show maturity as if from a recent generation, when others of the same species will only produce flowers. But that seems to lack probability.
   444. They report that nitre mixed with water up to the consistency of honey, if applied to the buds for anointing after the pruning of the vine, shows germination within eight days. The probable cause is (if we are not deceived by a spurious experiment) in the spirit of nitre, which is the soul of vegetables, having entered the bud and the adjacent parts, and opening them as it penetrates.
   445. Take seeds, and kernels of apples, pears, and oranges, or the stone of a peach or plum, etc., and insert them into a sea-squill (which is not unlike a larger onion), and they will experience growth more quickly than from the earth. This is,

--- Page 313 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V.      269
This, in my opinion, is a kind of
grafting in the root. For just as a stock
communicates nourishment more prepared to
adopted shoots than crude earth does by
itself, so the squill provides exactly the same
to the seed. I suspect something similar could
be attempted by inserting kernels, turnips,
and things of that kind; except that the heat
and vigor of the squill might be superior.
Experience should also be consulted, at my
suggestion, whether onion seeds inserted into
an onion head would hasten and enrich
the yield of onions.
   446. To mark fruit here and there with
scattered small punctures, when it has almost
reached its proper thickness and maturity,
was a matter of excellent success, and a kind
of stimulus for anticipated maturity. An example
of this acceleration is in fruits which wasps
or worms have settled upon, making small
bites.
   447. They say that sea-algae, inserted
into the roots of cabbages, and perhaps other
plants, contributes to the promotion of growth.
For its virtue undoubtedly comes with salt,
a great aid to fertility.
   448. Experience has taught that if the
stem of cucumbers is cut off near the ground
immediately after germination, and is grafted
               M 3            onto

--- Page 314 ---
**FRANCIS BACON'S**

...and if as much earth as suffices is applied to the remaining plant, the fruits of the following year will far anticipate the usual time. The reason may perhaps be a quicker descent of sap, not consumed in the stem or leaves, but directed to the remaining parts once the fruit is removed. Observe from this, that through winter cold, the death of roots and annually reviving plants seems to arise from an excessive expenditure of sap distributed into the stem and leaves. If that (expenditure) is suspended by an injected barrier, they will endure (become perennial) if placed in a warm spot.

449. Frequent plucking of flowers from a fruit-bearing tree makes the tree more vigorous; the reason is manifest, that (otherwise) the sap is less sufficient for nourishment. It has also been found by frequent and obvious experiments, that a tree dies if, when it first blossoms, some flowers are not plucked.

450. It would be profitable to test the outcome, if all the flowers of a fruit-bearing tree were plucked, or if acorns and chestnut buds, etc., were removed from a wild tree for two continuous years. I conjecture that the fruits of the third year would be thicker and more abundant, or that it would luxuriate in leaves from more abundant sap.

451. It is a common opinion that a plant watered with warm (water) grows more successfully and quickly than one soaked with cold (water) or rain. But, that...

--- Page 315 ---
**Previous page text for continuity:**
270      FRANCISCI BACONI
ciatur quanta ſufficit terra, ſequentis an-
ni fructus longe prævertere conſuetum
tempus; ratio forte ſit, celerior ſucci de-
ſcenſus nec in caudicem, nec in frondes
conſumpti, fructu amoto reliquas. Ob-
ſerva hinc, quod per hibernum frigus mors
radicum & plantarum annuatim reviviſ-
centium oriri videatur ex nimio ſucci
impendio diſtributi in caudicem & fron-
des. Si ſuſpendatur illud injecto obice,
perennabunt calido loco conſtitutæ.
   449. Avulſio florum crebra in arbore
fructifera, arborem venuſtiorem reddit;
ratio eſt manifeſta, quod ſuccus alendo
minus ſufficiat. Compertum quoque fre-
quentibus & obviis experimentis, ex-
ſtingui arborem non avulſis, ubi prmum
arbor effloruerit, nonnullis floribus.
   450. Profuerit tentare eventus fortu-
nam, ſi omnes arboris frugiferæ flores de-
cerperentur, aut glandes, & caſtanearum
gemmæ, &c. arbori ſylveſtri demerentur
per continuum biennium. Conjicio, craſ-
ſiores futuros & copioſiores tertii anni
fructus, aut frondibus luxuriaturam ex
ſucco abundantiore.
   451. Vulgaris opinio eſt, plantam ca-
lida irrigatam felicius citiuſque excreſce-
re quam frigida aut imbre perfuſam. Sed,
quod

---

**Translation:**

SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 271
which we did, the experiment with wheat infused (as [a] we said) with hot water, was unsuccessful. The cause was perhaps an error in the chosen time of year, namely the end of October, when the seed, softened by hot water, might have suffered damage from the cold.

452. It is not doubted that fruit is generally better from grafting. The reason suggests itself, that the nourishment is prepared in the stock rather than in the raw earth. It must be observed, however, what they say, that some trees grow more successfully from the seed than from grafting, such as quinces and the Persian apple. I state the cause to be that the nourishment which these plants require is more humid. And although that (nourishment from the stock) excels in fineness and preparation, nevertheless, in humidity and abundance, it cannot compete with nourishment from the earth, since we see that these fruits are by their nature very cold.

453. No one contradicts the opinion that if a smaller pear is grafted onto a stock, it will produce pears larger than usual and will increase in size. But in my judgment, the same truth applies here as in that opinion concerning early fruit, if it is grafted onto a late-fruiting stock, and vice versa; both of which [b] we previously
                                  M 4 nobis

a] Exper. 402.
b] Exper. 421.

--- Page 316 ---
272          FRANCIS BACON'S
rejected by us, since the dominion belongs to the scions. Nevertheless, those who believe that if grafting is done onto a stock from heterogeneous plants, which are more succulent in their own stem, the fruits will be larger due to the abundance of nourishment supplied, are sufficiently justified by probability; although the conjecture that they will be cheaper may not depart from the truth. But in general, a drier stem is chosen for grafting; thus, a scion of a domestic apple is grafted onto a wild apple, a pear onto a thorn, etc. They report, however, that in regions with lower soil, from apple scions grafted onto a cabbage stalk, large apples of a flaccid taste are produced; from whose planted seed a cabbage will grow, not an apple. It would be worthwhile to observe whether the germination of apple scions would be more successful if they are transferred to be adopted onto a willow, or a poplar, alder, elm, or even horse-plums [*a*], the most humid of all trees. I have heard that this attempt on an elm did not lack the desired outcome.
     454. It is established by experiments that transplanted flowers become larger, because wherever the soil is looser, nourishment succeeds more easily there. It is very probable, from the frequently repeated [grafting/transplanting] of the same scions—

     *a*] *Horse-Plumme.*

--- Page 317 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 273
by the grafting of scions, fruits grow larger;
so that if grafted onto a stock in the first year, and then you cut them off, and in the following year graft the same onto another stock, and thus continue the grafting for a third
or fourth year, migrating them elsewhere;
when you cease the transplantation, you will perceive larger fruits, whatever they may yield.

Many experiments of grafting exist
worthy of note, but we assign a proper place to these.

455. The cutting off of the top of a leafy fig tree contributes to better fruits. The reason is manifest, because there is less to nourish, and the path by which the sap flows is more direct than in its ascent. But probability leads us to believe that the yield will be slower, as we noted before. Something similar could be attempted in other trees.

456. They report that by variously perforating the trunk of trees, and inserting, where it is permeable, a wedge of a warm tree, such as Terebinth, Mastic, Guaiacum, Juniper, etc., the fruits are rendered more excellent, and the fertility of the trees is increased; the reason perhaps being that the native sap of the tree is invigorated and nourished by the adventitious heat.

457. From report we have that trees approach
M 5 borum

--- Page 318 ---
274 OF FRANCIS BACON
...the size and fruits of trees may become better, if you apply salt, wine dregs, or blood to their roots. The reason, perhaps, is that the vigor of the spirit in the roots is restored and gains increase, since a greater efficacy is inherent in these substances than in those commonly used.

458. Someone among the ancients asserts that cultivated thistles become tender and shed whatever harshness they have, if flint blunts and scrapes off the heads of their seeds.

459. You will give tenderness and beauty to herbs if you transfer them as soon as they sprout from their beds into pots filled with better soil. Above, we heard about changing beds, but with an interval of years; here, however, it is a sudden transfer, not separated by time. The observation of previous transfers contains the reason.

460. It is the opinion of someone among the ancients that cabbages grow more luxuriantly and are of a more pleasing flavor if sometimes irrigated with salt water; especially that to which nitre is mixed; the spirit [of nitre], compared to salt, being less burning.

461. They say that cucumbers will be more tender and delicate whose seeds have been soaked a little in milk. The reason, perhaps, is that the seed softened by milk does not so much absorb the coarser juices of the earth but the finer
ones...

--- Page 319 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 275
substances are able to draw. That experiment could be applied to cultivated thistles, and other seeds, with their decay or bitterness removed. A similar effect is attributed to those steeped in water mixed with honey. But they do not obtain my assent, since honey consists of too volatile a spirit.
     462. They report that cucumbers will be less watery and more like melons, if the pit in which they are to be planted is half filled with maple wood and wood shavings, with earth heaped on top. For cucumbers greatly delight in moisture, and are overwhelmed by too much; which the maple and shavings prevent. This account proceeds further, namely, if to a sprouted cucumber you place a pot filled with water, removed by an interval of four or five inches, and that for a space of 24 hours, the germination, emerging more profusely, will fill the entire intervening space. If the experiment is true, it should be considered of a more excellent nature than to allow itself to be reduced under this heading. For it proves that plants perceive acutely and are moved towards that from which they receive aid, however much separated by some distance. An old tradition concerning the vine deserves more admiration; because it will indeed creep forward by germinating to that place where, from some interval, a support has been placed
                               M 6                      or

--- Page 320 ---
276      FRANCIS BACON
or a stake. This is more (as we said) astonishing than the preceding ones. For that former one could be referred to the sympathy of attraction, this is the operation of rational discourse.
463. Among the preceding observations is one concerning the boring of trees, and thus contributing to their more fruitful growth; which also attests to sweeter and better fruits. The reason is, that the boring does not place an obstacle to receiving as much nourishment as suffices, but allows that [sap] to flow out which they are able to change and digest, the viler and useless sap being rejected through perspiration. Thus we see animals, from moderate nourishment, exercise, and perspiration, acquire a bodily condition of robust health.
464. What the boring of trees is to fruits, that is the letting of blood to plants; such as the pricking of vines and other trees, at some time after germination, from which the emission of gum or tears arises; but from which, unlike boring, continuity ought to be absent, a selection of the year's seasons having been made. They report that by this method bitter almonds become sweet.
465. The ancients consider pig dung most highly recommended above others for sweetening fruits. Perhaps because a great deal of moisture in that animal blunts the excre-

--- Page 321 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 277
the pungency of the excrements, since no
meat is more moist than pork.
466. It has been observed by some that
herbs of sweeter smell and taste grow on a
shoot, when the others have been cut off at
some time after germination, with one remaining.
Perhaps because of a longer delay of the sap in the root,
and thus a more elaborate concoction. For
among other reasons, the most solid reason why
grains, seeds, and fruits have a greater nourishing
faculty than leaves, is derived from the time of
maturation. It would be advisable, with conveniently
devised aids, to prolong the retarded juices of
herbs or similar things until summer, which season
might perhaps strengthen them into greater nourishing
power.
467. Just as a happier growth and a more
approved nature of fruits are generally ascribed
to inoculation, than if they grow from their kernels
or stones, because of the nourishment of more
accurate concoction; so from grafting we think
the same is to be hoped for the same reason,
if a stem is chosen for this purpose, with the
caution applied that it be a little inferior to the
shoots, lest the vigor of the latter be blunted and grow dull.
They highly recommend the grafting of pears or
apples onto a quince tree.
468. Besides those things which pertain to correcting
fruits

--- Page 322 ---
278     OF FRANCIS BACON
fruits we have presented, it has been handed
down to memory, as if proven by use, that a mix-
ture of bran and swine dung, or of maple and
pig dung (especially if heaped up, so that
they may rot, a whole month is given) is a remarkable
nourishment and aid to a fruit-
bearing tree.
    469. They report that onions grow larger
if they are taken out of the earth and for twenty days
are exposed to the sun to dry, and then planted
again; indeed, even if they are stripped of their outermost
skin.
    470. It is commonly said by some
that if a branch from a dwarf and fruit-
bearing tree, from a recent germination, is gently
bent, avoiding the danger of injury, and led
down into an earthenware pot with a perforated bottom, through which
it is admitted and exits, then the pot is covered by throwing
in earth, fruit is seen most
abundantly beneath the bottom. This experiment is a mere fruit
potting without removal, the fruit being left in
the earth. They report a similar outcome will occur
if an empty pot is placed upon the fruit,
which is supported by a mere peg while it hangs from the tree,
and the matter will proceed better
if the pot is perforated in several places. They add the
reason, besides that the intensity of the sun's
heat and the injury of the air are excluded,
that the fruit, by drawing in freer air,
                                                                benefits...

--- Page 323 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 279
...joicing and desiring the Sun, is invited out by these perforations, and disperses itself, having emerged into the open air as closely as possible, thus gaining an enlargement of itself.

471. Trees planted should possess the earth with roots sent deeper where the soil is deep and sandy; but where it is more watery, with roots driven less deeply [a]. Moreover, when they are to be transplanted (especially fruit-bearing ones), care must be taken that they are turned towards the North and South, etc., the same directions they faced before. The same is plainly attributed to stone from the quarry, to which greater durability is attributed. But here the probability seems to fail, because stone is not exposed to the Sun as much as a tree while it germinates.

472. A tree [b] that is to provide material for craftsmen grows more successfully in a wood than in an open field, partly because it does not have room to spread out with a wider growth of branches, which it entirely devotes to height; partly (which is rather the other reason) because it is not troubled by excessive Sun or wind (immediate dangers to the germination of fruits). And so, undoubtedly, fruit-bearing trees or vines planted on a mound, or facing the Sun, in-

[a] *more shallow.*
[b] *Timber Trees.*

--- Page 324 ---
280           FRANCIS BACON'S
[continuation of 472]
—ferior, between [*a*] the buttresses of buildings or by a heap of stones piled up to some height, ripen better than if they are placed on flat ground.

473. They say that [*b*] the roots of Potado, or potatoes or Spanish batatas, placed in an earthenware pot filled with earth, which is then lowered to four or five inches below the surface of the earth, grow unusually large. The reason may be that, having obtained enough earth to be nourished, and being prevented by the bottom of the pot, as if by an impediment, from pushing their fibers deeper into the earth and occupying it more deeply, they necessarily direct their forces of growth into thickness and breadth. Perhaps the same good fortune would happen to seeds or roots of any kind placed in a pot and hidden under the earth.

474. If the leaves of a radish or another root are cut off when the year begins to winter, and they have not entirely withered, and the root is again covered with earth to a proper depth, it would remain unharmed through the entire winter, and the next spring would see it thicker, as we have partly observed this before. Therefore, this cutting is notable for a double advantage, since it both [preserves] the plants with roots—

---
a] *between Elbows or Buttresses of Stone.*
b] *Potado Roots.*

--- Page 325 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. *Cent.* V. 281
...edible roots, such as radishes, parsnips,
to grow larger, to which is similar
what happens in the heads of onions; and edible fruits,
with strengthened roots, it renders larger.

475. It is of great pleasure to increase the measure
of leaves of shady trees; and the reliability of experiment
has overcome all doubt, if the trunk of a common elm has
received grafted shoots of a broad-leaved or mountain elm[*a*],
as if the width of the produced leaves will fill the margin.
Nor should we entirely think it beyond the truth, that just as
grafted fruit-bearing trees produce larger fruits, so will it
exhibit larger leaves on barren trees. Therefore, the experiment
should especially be made on the lime tree, aspen, willow,
especially that one which shines and is called the swallow's
tail[*b*], because of the beauty of its leaves.

476. Accidental barrenness of trees (if you exclude
defects of soil, seed, root, and injury from air) is from
excessive growth of moss, or from being leathery, or from
planting too deeply, or from sap flowing too much into the
leaves. The preceding [points] have offered remedies for these
evils. Expe-

a] *of a VVeech-Elme.*
b] *Svvallovv-Taile.*

--- Page 326 ---
282          OF FRANCIS BACON

Various experiments concerning the compo-
     sition of fruits and flowers.
Among living things that distinguish sexes, we observe various results from various coition, and as it were a certain composition in creatures. Thus a mule is generated from a horse and a she-ass; and other changes in species are given, which are called monsters, but are rarer. That proverb
too, 'Africa always produces something monstrous,' is not thought to have flowed from any other origin than that the scarcity of spring water in a parched region gathers various beasts from all sides to a watering place, which, refreshed after slaking their thirst, very frequently mix with a species not their own. The variety of composition and coition in plant genera has not yet been thoroughly investigated by experiments; yet, if it can be attempted, it is more subject to our control than that of animals, where the itch of pleasure creeps in, and they rush spontaneously into Venus. Therefore, that composition of plants, if it can be achieved, will be most noble,
inasmuch as it promises diverse and new names of fruits and unknown flowers. Inoculation (grafting) does nothing towards this, merely improving fruit, duplicating flowers, etc., but it is ineffective for generating a new species; the scions predominating over the stock.

--- Page 327 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century V. 283

477. Some of the ancients recorded that the sprouts of fruit-bearing trees of various species, having their sides joined and very tightly bound, when placed in the earth, would form a single trunk from which they would sprout, with the fruits unmixed, testifying to the unconfused nature of their own species. Hence it is to be noted in passing, that the unity of continuation is an easier task than that of species. They also report that if vines accustomed to bearing red and white grapes are planted in the earth, their uppermost parts being gathered and tied together, there will be grapes of various colors on the same branch, and similarly distinct grape seeds of the same grape; but this occurs where the course of one and another year has perfected the unity (as it seems) more through germination. It would be useful after the first rudiments, as it were, of the union, to irrigate frequently; since in any moisture there is an inherent power of uniting. They also advise tying the bud as soon as it swells; at least for a time.

478. They record that various seeds, wrapped in a small linen cloth, and placed in well-manured earth, will produce contiguous plants, whose shoots are to be incorporated later if they are gathered. A similar account concerns kernels, to be placed in a narrow-mouthed flask filled with earth.

479. And this too is mentioned in the accounts of others,

--- Page 328 ---
284        OF FRANCIS BACON
accounts, that tender trees differing in spe-
cies, if placed close together, not bound,
in fertile soil, and frequently watered, will by their very
luxuriance become incorporated and coale-
sce. This surpasses in probability the other things hitherto
proposed, since binding hinders
the tree from swelling according to the law of nature, with u-
nion being more convenient through movement.

*Various experiments concerning the sym-*
*pathy and antipathy of plants.*

Many traditions and observations have flowed
down to us from deep antiquity, accepted by public belief, concerning
the sympathy and antipathy of plants;
namely, that some rejoice in the vicinity of others, growing more
vigorously from sympathy, while others shrink away, faring
ill from antipathy. But these concepts betray igno-
rance, lacking true knowledge of causes, as many expe-
riments concerning sympathy and antipathy
teach. In plants there is no such agreement from friendship or from
enmity disagreement, such as people fabri-
cate for themselves with vain imagination, and which they designate with the utterly erroneous
nomenclature of sympathy and antipathy. On the contrary, here all
things happen, with sympathy declining into antipathy,
and vice versa, when in this
                                            manner

--- Page 329 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 285
it happens in this way. If a plant draws its own peculiar sap, [a] such as imbues the earth (as it qualifieth the Earth), so that what is left behind by the former becomes unsuitable for another plant, then proximity is beneficial, because the nourishment is of a contrary nature and not of the same kind. But if two plants are nourished by the same sap, even if it is sufficiently abundant, proximity is harmful, one defrauding the other.

480. Therefore, any plant that feeds largely from the earth, and thus [b] by drying it out (soaking the Earth) exhausts it, harms all those placed near it; such as large trees (especially the ash) and all those that send their roots not far from the earth's surface. Thus, not only is there discord between the cabbage and the vine, though not unknown to the ancients, but also the cabbage does not agree well with other trees, inasmuch as it preys most greedily on the richest saps of the earth. And, if it be true that a vine creeping near a cabbage turns its path elsewhere, the reason might be the poorer nourishment it encounters; and although the root may be in the same place as the cabbage, nevertheless (I somewhat doubt it) the plant to be nourished will turn itself away.

481. Plants of different natures, and to be nourished by different sap, thrive in friendly conjunction.

[a] as it qualifieth the Earth.
[b] soake the Earth.

--- Page 330 ---
286      FRANCISCI BACONI
thrive, as we said; and many of the ancients
write that rue, placed near a fig tree, grows very
happily and is rendered more efficacious.
This happens, as I think, not from agreement,
but by the extraction of a contrary sap, which
one plant elicits so that it may sweeten, the
other so that it may become bitter. From their
narration also we have that a rose is rendered
more pleasing from the vicinity of garlic, or
also for this reason, that the more fetid sap
enters the garlic, and the more fragrant sap
enters the rose.

482. It is also manifest that flowers grow
among corn, which, when planted, very rarely
or never grow elsewhere, except in the place
we mentioned; such as the cornflower, a species
of yellow marigold, wild poppy, and fumitory.
Nor does cultivation of the soil achieve this by
plowing or furrowing; just as certain herbs
and flowers only grow in new ditches, which
untouched and unsown earth would not produce
with spades; so much so that corn seems to
imbue the earth with a quality, and prepare it
for those about to grow.

483. If the outcome, which probability
promises, is not lacking for this observation, it
will have contributed greatly to correcting the
taste in fruits and edible herbs. For I do not
doubt that if a fig placed near intensifies the
efficacy and bitterness of rue (as the ancients
note), that

                                                               quin

--- Page 331 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 287**
but rather that a great abundance of rue around the fig, increased by the sweetness of the fig, may return the favor. For the most unpleasant flavors in fruits, herbs, and roots are bitter, harsh, sour, and watery. Therefore, it is expedient to put the following to the test.

484. Plant lettuce or Pompeian cabbage, or an improved thistle, next to wormwood or rue, and observe if the sweetness increases in the lettuce and the others.

485. Place service-trees, cornelian cherry trees, or elder trees – trees with harsh and astringent juice – near a vineyard or fig tree, to explore what pleasantness has been added to the fruits.

486. Intersperse cucumbers or gourds here and there among muskmelons [a], so that you may experience whether the flavor of the melons becomes more vinous and more pleasant. Moreover, with a cucumber mixed among radishes planted around it, observe whether it intensifies the pungency in the radishes.

487. Take a sorrel and plant it among a thorny raspberry bush, and note whether the raspberry bush becomes sweeter.

488. Plant a dog-rose among violets and pellitory, and observe whether the sweetness in the violets or pellitory is increased, with a less earthy odor. So also, plant cucumbers or lettuce among rosemary or laurel...

[a] Muske-Melons.

--- Page 332 ---
288      OF FRANCIS BACON
will show whether the fragrance of Rosemary or Laurel is more pleasant and more aromatic.
      489. Conversely, you ought to avoid the proximity of herbs that share the same sap. In this way, I think, Rosemary will suffer a loss of sweetness if placed near lavender, laurel, or similar plants. But if one wishes to diminish the efficacy of a herb, it is advisable to join other such plants nearby, so that its virtue may become weak. Mugwort placed near Angelica will perhaps become more languid and more suitable for a mixture in fumigation, and rue from the proximity of common wormwood may degenerate more towards Roman wormwood.
      490. The meaning of this axiom embraces many things, and therefore selection is necessary so that a more exact method of experiment may be adopted; nor is variety so much to be regarded here as further perfection.
      491. It may be permitted to make an experiment with poisonous and purgative herbs, which might allow their native malignity to be removed or broken by applying to them the temperament of a more efficacious poison or purgative.
      492. It is reported that the shrub called smooth or black bryony, which is a species of bryony, and cabbage, when brought very close to each other, have a harmful conjunction either for one or for both; for they are twin preda-

--- Page 333 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century V. 289
...predators inhabit the land to mutual destruction. Something similar is said of the reed and the fern, both succulent, and one hindering the other. The same applies to hemlock and rue, which, because of their strong juices, one might call usurpers.

493. Ancient and modern writers, some from the school of natural magic, observed a sympathy between the Sun, Moon, and principal Stars, and herbs and plants. Hence, names derived from the Sun and Moon arose, and other things which, ostentatiously adorned from the storehouse of absurdities, were sold. It is established that certain herbs have a twofold relation to the Sun, so that they either open themselves or close, or bend or incline their head. For marigold, tulips, pimpernel, and most flowers expand their leaves at the splendor of the Sun; partly they contract in response to the approach of evening or a cloudy sky. Nor should the reason be assigned so pompously, that they rejoice at the Sun's presence and are saddened by its absence, since the closing is nothing else than the weighing down of the leaves and swelling around the lowest parts from moist air, which, when dry, extends them. And they consider it a kind of miracle that garden clover hides its stem when the Sun is shining, when it is merely the fullest expansion of the leaves.
N Verti-

--- Page 334 ---
290          FRANCIS BACON
The sun-rose, marigold, wartwort (which is a species of chondrilla), mallow flowers, and others demonstrate the inclination of the head. The cause is somewhat more obscure than the preceding one, yet I recognize no other than that the stem sends forth the part exposed to the sun, somewhat weak and flaccid, being less able to support the flower strongly.
     494. What a little moisture can do in vegetables, even dead and separated from the earth, conjurers demonstrate, for whom an oat awn is sometimes used, which, if you pay close attention, is twisted in the lower part, but at the top is a whole and light straw. They take the twisted part, cutting off the rest, and leaving the awn the length of a finger. Then they form a small cross from a reed, selecting the part of it that consists of pith and is oriented lengthwise, and another part that is transverse with respect to the part of the reed that lacks pith, so that the entire cross equals the height of an upright finger. Afterwards they pinch the bottom part which contains the pith, and insert the awn into it, with half of the reed (cross) sticking out. Then they take a small white wooden box, as if an auxiliary device for the trick, into which a hole is pressed with a feather, sufficient for holding the awn, so that the cross, not having passed through to the bottom, remains fixed.
                                                  Impo-

--- Page 335 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 291

Deceptions, to be handled more cautiously, are prefaced by a question, such as, "Which woman in this assembly is of outstanding beauty?" or "Who hides a glove or playing cards?" Meanwhile, another is ordered to recite various names, and at the mention of each person, the cross is fixed in the box, first applied to the mouth, as if to cast a spell; yet it is not moved when they come to the person designated within themselves; while they apply the cross to the mouth, they touch the beard of the oat with the tip of the tongue and moisten it, and thus the cross is fixed in the box. Afterwards, it is seen to turn gently and quietly four or five times, which arises from the unfolding of the oat's beard due to the moisture secretly applied. These things will be more evident if the cross is fixed between the fingers, instead of in the box. Hence it is evident that this movement from slight moistening is more effective than that contraction of leaves, or the inclination of the head in the marigold.

495. It has become known from the report of some that the herb called Solis (from which aqua fortis is made), when the Sun is highest and hottest in its orbit, bears a great deal of dew sprinkled on its leaves, from which it may be called "dew of the Sun." This is attributed to sympathy, and that which intervenes for it with the Sun

N 2 sym-

--- Page 336 ---
292          FRANCIS BACON'S
sympathy. Men are accustomed to favor
miracles. Therefore, it should first be inquired
whether the remnants of the morning dew do not persist until this
midday time, where in other [plants] the dew, consumed by exhalation, has vanished.
For it consists of smooth and thick leaves,
from which the dew is not so easily wiped off, as
from other more porous and spongy herbs.
The same could be observed in purslane or any other [plant],
and have escaped the less attentive industry of observers. But if
the matter stands thus, that midday shows more moisture
than morning, then indeed it seems to be the exudation of the
herb itself, as plums placed in an oven exude.
Nor do I think it should be considered similar to Gideon's fleece,
which alone, while all others were dry, preserved the
dew.
     496. It is certain that honeydew is found
more frequently on oak leaves,
than on ash or strawberry, or a similar tree.
But it admits of controversy, whether it should be
attributed to the leaves themselves, so that the dew is concocted,
or merely because they are dense and smooth,
and therefore do not absorb the dew, but
display it preserved. An accurate investigation would be needed,
whether manna, a medicine or drug, is sprinkled
only on certain leaves or herbs. Flowers
                                        profun-

--- Page 337 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 293
flowers in deep follicles at the bottom collect a kind of honey, such as honeysuckle (as well as the greater bird's-foot trefoil and clover), lilies, and similar [plants]. In these, indeed, the flower becomes a partaker of the dew.

497. Experience has taught that the foam, which is called 'wode-sare' or cuckoo-spit (a kind of saliva), is collected on some plants, and on warm ones, such as lavender, pontic wormwood [a] with slender leaves, or Roman wormwood, sage, hyssop, etc. Inquire into the cause; for it is among the secrets of nature. Crops are also damaged by rust, which perhaps also harms other plants, not yet observed to that extent.

498. It would be useful to experiment how much agreement there is between plants and water, their primary nourishment; whether it flows to them at a distance, and not only from contact. Therefore, take a vessel, the middle of which is fitted with a hidden bottom made of thicker hemp, so that it holds earth that is not wet, on which seed is sprinkled. Below the hemp, about half a foot deep in the bottom of the vessel, place a large sponge full of moisture. After ten days, inspect whether the seeds have grown, and whether the earth becomes moist as the sponge dries out. That [story] about a cucumber creeping towards a pot filled with water (which N 3 in

[a] Lavender-cotton.

--- Page 338 ---
294          OF FRANCIS BACON
(which, as N 3, appears in [a] previous experiments) is more worthy of admiration.

*Various experiments on how herbs and fruits*
*may be adapted for medicinal uses.*

499. Vain are the things told, and equal to fictions, concerning the altering of the smell, color, or taste of fruit by infusion, mixture, or grafting into the bark or root of a tree, flower, or herb, so that its substance, imbued with this or that color, becomes aromatic or medicinal; the reason being that all these things have completed their period and do not nourish, and any such alteration of qualities in vegetables must necessarily occur from that which can serve as nourishment for the plant.
But it is true that if cows feed on wild garlic, the milk is imbued with the taste of garlic. Mutton too is more pleasing to the taste if the sheep feeds on wild thyme and other very wholesome herbs. Galen mentions cow's milk in the cure of scirrhus of the liver, when the animal's fodder consists only of certain herbs. Spanish honey smells almost of Rosemary or Orange, from where the bee collects it. From the ancients came that story of the girl nourished by Aconite (than which, among all vegetables, nothing is more immediately

[a] Experiment 462.

--- Page 339 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 595
(is not more poisonous) and continuous use had made it harmless to her, while it killed others who dealt with it. Others observed that Bezoar is given, some potent and some of no efficacy, distinguishable also by a difference in appearance; and one (type) is collected from beasts accustomed to feed in mountains, where there are theriacal herbs; the other, ineffective namely, from those (beasts) which have fed in valleys, where such herbs are not found. Up to now I hold this view: that just as maceration renders wines and beers medicinal, and moreover, a certain compounding of powders imbues bread; so also foods (meat, fish, milk, eggs) can be transformed into the role of medicine and a support for diet, if the beast, bird, or fish is fed with things chosen for this purpose and suitable for the disease. However, the matter would not be without danger in secret poisonings. But doubts prevent asserting that these things can be referred to plants and herbs, inasmuch as the sap, their nourishment, is more common, and with difficulty admits a quality not assimilated by the plant.

500. But lest the prejudice of incredulity hinder most useful experiments (especially since many of the ancients have committed them to writing), we have deemed it worthwhile to briefly propose four methods from their ideas, so that plants may be made medicinal.
N 4

--- Page 340 ---
296        OF FRANCIS BACON
medicinal. The first is, a splitting of the root, and an infusion of medicine into it, such as hellebore, opium, scammony, theriac, etc. And then a binding. Probability is lacking for this opinion, because the root draws immediately from the earth, whence the nourishment is more common and less qualified. Moreover, a longer delay is required before it is insinuated into the fruits. The second is, to pierce the body of the tree, and to insert medicine into it; which is to be preferred to the former. For if any power of the medicine is received, the path to ascent is shorter and to be completed in less time. The third, is the maceration of the seed or kernel in a liquid into which medicine has been infused. This method is very suspect to me, since the seed (as I believe) does not attract parts of matter imbued with the property. But it is much more probable, if the medicine is mixed with dung; because the seed naturally imbibing moisture from the dung might likewise also receive some property. The fourth, is frequent irrigation of the plant with an infused medicine. This method seems to prevail over the others for this reason, because a frequent and repeated application of the medicine occurs, whereas others are applied only once, so that the virtue might more easily vanish. But I utterly doubt and fear,

--- Page 341 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. V. 297
—and, lest a more stubborn root repel the
subtle impressions. Moreover (as we said be-
fore) there is a long interval of ascent.
What is less improbable (in my judgment,
indeed) is the perforation of the tree
sparsely through various places of the trunk, and of the ho-
les, which are one above another, and the fil-
ling with manure to which medicine is mixed,
and the irrigation of the manured mass with a sprinkling of medi-
cine infused into the manure from water, once every
three or four days.

*End of the Fifth Century of Natural History.*

N 3 FRAN-

--- Page 342 ---
298

[Decorative horizontal band with floral motifs]

FRANCIS BACON'S
OF VERULAM
NATURAL
HISTORY
SIXTH CENTURY.

Various experiments concerning the curiosity
of fruits and plants.

[Large decorative initial T] The whole labor of this endeavor revolves around this
(as we frequently remind the Reader), that experiments
should be fruitful or illuminating, detesting
impostures and whatever serves the purpose of mere
curiosity. Since, however, something must be conceded
to another's whim, we shall open a little of curiosity's
drawers, as far as plants are concerned.

501. Of this kind it is, to have in one
tree various fruits; especially if some
anticipate others in ripeness, so that no part of summer
may be that does not yield ripe fruits there.
Nor is this difficult, if into
branches, which from one trunk several
go forth, you graft shoots of various natures in rich soil
and of more abundant sap. Thus not of one
species cherries, plums, peaches,
apricots

--- Page 343 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 299
apricots, the same trunk will give. But when I speak of diverse fruits, I mean such as the nature of the stock does not reject as conflicting. Hence I doubt whether a stock that adopts plums is suitable for receiving apples [or] oranges.

502. It is a curiosity to impress variously devised shapes upon fruits: this is an easy task, if you shape the tender ones in clay or wooden molds. Thus, one can have cucumbers oblong like a reed, round like a sphere, or shaped into the form of a cross. Apples also shaped like pears or citrons. Indeed, you can even give fruits the most accurate shapes, namely of a man, of beasts, of birds, from a fabricated image which you teach them to imitate as they grow. With this observation, however, that the mold which you surround [the fruit with] should fill a proper capacity, and that narrowness should not cause imperfection of the fruit, if it grows to its proper size. If the opposite happens, you will prevent the expansion of its mass from spreading throughout and filling the entire hollow, and you will be frustrated in your desire for the impression, as usually happens in shaping liquids. But someone might doubt whether the exclusion of the sun might not be harmful to the fruit? Obvious experience answers in fruits that grow covered. Let it also be inquired whether not
               N 6               factis

--- Page 344 ---
300         **OF FRANCIS BACON**
by making holes here and there in the wood, the sun
might be admitted. *Note*, it is best to use
divisible molds for this experiment, which,
joined with glue or cement, can be separated
if the fruit is to be removed.
      503. It is of the same kind of curiosity to
inscribe or en-grave on fruits or trees what they
bear. This is easily accomplished if letters are
impressed upon tender fruits with a needle, stylus,
graving tool, or similar instrument, which, as the
fruits grow, will display larger marks.
      — *And to engrave my loves on tender*
*trees; they will grow, and you, my loves, will grow.*
      504. Trees can also be adorned with flowers
or herbs growing out of them, if, after their
trunks are perforated, earth enriched with manure
is inserted, upon which seeds, violet shoots,
strawberries, wild thyme, chamomile, and similar
things are sprinkled. The tree, like a pot, will
display all these, even if a part of the nourishment
is perhaps supplied by the tree itself. It could also
be attempted with vine shoots and the roots of red
roses; perhaps to be incorporated into the tree itself;
as they are more woody in nature.
      505. A common example of curiosity is
mentioned concerning the peculiar shaping of trees
and shrubs (such as rosemary and similar plants)
which is achieved by an internal, as it were, direc-

--- Page 345 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 301
direction and external amputation. But they trifle, since their slenderness does not admit of shaping. Antiquity has celebrated masses of arches made from trees upon wooden structures, with turrets and bows added.

506. Here I will give a place to coloration, however little it may achieve, since the prerogative of excellence in flowers comes from beauty. It has been observed by some that carnations, [a] Sweet-Williams, colored violets, namely if they are neglected, neither watered, nor newly [b] moulded, nor transplanted, degenerate in such a way that they become white. And it is probable that those which are white become colored from frequent cultivation; since it is most true that whiteness arises from a lack of nourishment; except for flowers for which it is native, which reject every other color.

507. Therefore it is expedient to diligently consult nature, what colors she produces, so that where the light of previous observation shows the way, by imitating it, you may produce colors in natural things. White flowers are generally far inferior in scent to others of the same species conspicuous with another color. This is shown by white

a] Sweet-Williams.
b] nor New Moulded.

--- Page 346 ---
302          OF FRANCIS BACON
white simple violet, white roses, white
carnations, [_a_] hoary tree-like stock.
So too it is established that the whitish flowers of trees
are for the most part odorless, such as those of the
cherry, pear, plum, the flowers of the cultivated
and wild apple, the almond, (unlike) the reddish
and fragrant flowers of the peach. The reason is, because the
substance of the flower comes from that which in the plant
is most subtle and purest, whence, painted with such a
pleasing color, it shines. If that (substance) is too sparse
and meager, an ineffective odor will languish,
unless in very succulent plants; so that a diminution
of nourishment is required rather than an increase, if one
strives to achieve fragrance. This is observed
in the white satyrion, or white orchids, of a very
delicate odor, and in the flowers of peas.
Again, if a plant is naturally white in its flowers,
not due to thinness or dryness, it usually strikes the
nostrils with a disagreeable odor, as May flowers
and white lilies do.
     508. On the contrary, among berries that are white,
they generally surpass others in sweet flavor, as
appears in white grapes, the white fruit of the raspberry,
white strawberries, and white currants. The reason is,
because those dyed with another color are considered to have a coarser
juice, and that more turgid, so that a proper and
even concoction is lacking, which happens more
suitably to the white ones.
  _a_] _VVhite Stock-Gilly-Flovvers._          509. In-

--- Page 347 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 303
509. Among fruits, white ones are generally
of inferior quality, such as pear-shaped
plums, damascene plums, etc. Those that are blackish excel.
Among mulberries (which are counted among berries,
though they are a type of fruit), black ones are preferred
over white ones. The white autumn plum
is considered among the inferior ones, and [a] verdoccio
plums, or Camerarius's verdacea, and
Augustana plums, or dates, are disapproved of,
because their flavor is diluted by watery humor, whereas
a more exact digestion contributes to its sweetness
and pleasantness. Hence, plums more delicate than
others are of a drier nature, and grow from
a stone; such as plums resembling [b] sea
mussels and damascene plums, the peach
and apricot, etc. However, some fruits
not accustomed to turning black do not resemble
the nature of berries, and among these, the pale ones
excel in sweetness, such as [c] heart-cherries,
which the closer they get to white, the more
they sweeten compared to red ones, but cherries
called [d] griottes by the French are more sour.
    510. Take the seed of a clove of one
species (such as that [e] of the red-
                                                               dest clove-gilly-flower

a] Verdoccio.
b] the Muscle-Plumme, the Damaſin-Plumme.
c] Cœur-Cherry.
d] Egriot.
e] Clove-Gilly-Flovver.

--- Page 348 ---
304          FRANCIS BACON
...of the reddest carnation with a multiple flower, very common); from that planted, carnations of various colors will be born, as the nature of the seed concurs with the nourishment of the earth and produces; so much so that gardeners' experience has taught that out of hundreds, three or four can be produced more worthy and of greater price, such as purple, red, distinguished by various spots. The cause is undoubtedly from the diversity of the sap, which the earth of the same plot, though, supplies not uniformly, and, as chance appropriates its own to the seed, so it is born. A peculiar observation is that those of purple color always turn out simple, with sap, as it seems, inadequate, so that it is only sufficient for the succulent color, and not for a double flower. This experiment of various colors produced from one seed can be transferred to Larkes-Foot, blue Monk's-Hood, poppy, hollyhock.
     511. Few fruits are red inside, such as apples called Queene-apples, and those they call Rose-apples; mulberries also and grapes, but mostly around the skin. There is also a Persian apple (peach) whose rim around the stone is red, and
                                             [*a*] ce-

   *a*] Larkes-Foot.
   *b*] Monkes-Hood.
   *c*] Hollyoke.
   *d*] Queene-Apple.
   *e*] Roſe-Apple.

--- Page 349 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 305
[a] Egriot-cherries are tinged with internal redness. But none of the common pears, or those called wardens, or pyroles, plums, apricots, even if they are red on their outer surface, are colored red internally. Let the cause be investigated.

      512. The color commonly conspicuous in plants is green, which no flower exhibits. A primrose is found with a green flower, but it is pale rather than green. The leaves of some trees are rust-colored, or [b] reddish; such as are mostly the tender ones in the oak, vine, and hazel. Wind makes leaves putrid, and with leaves partly bent, it turns yellow, which seem to everyone equally vigorous and splendid as green ones. I am also persuaded that the yellow color is less succulent than green, and more akin to white. For observation has taught that yellow holly leaves are always turned towards the North, or North-East. Of roots, some are yellow, such as [c] yellow carrots: other plants are shown to be blood-red as to their stem and leaves, such as amaranth. Some herbs show an affinity for purple and redness, such as certain species

   a] Egriot-Cherry.
   b] Reddish.
   c] Carrets.

--- Page 350 ---
306          OF FRANCIS BACON
some sage, mint, sundew, &c. The leaves of others are white, like other species of sage and mint. But no leaf represents a blue or purple color. From this you may infer that the attenuated sap of the earth is digested into flowers, as also into fruits, but a coarser and more common sap into leaves.
     513. It is a matter of curiosity to render a flower double by frequent transplantation into new earth; conversely, negligence in transplanting makes a double flower single. The ready method for this is to immediately transplant whatever seeds of flowers have been sown, or shoots of them planted, as soon as they have produced, into new and good earth. Let it further be inquired whether the inoculation of flowers (as in hoary stock, common and musk roses, &c.) makes them double. There exists a cherry with a double flower, but the tree does not bear fruit. Perhaps those things applied to the tree which accelerate the ascent of the sap will digest it into double flowers, a spectacle altogether pleasing; especially in common apples, peaches, almonds, whose flowers are reddish.
     514. It is a matter of curiosity, or something more excellent than that, to render fruits stoneless; because by whatever means that may finally be achieved, they will always turn out more tender and more delicate. A bud or shoot lightly eme-

--- Page 351 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 307
depithed (provided, however, that enough of its remnants are preserved for life to be maintained) will produce fruits either entirely boneless or with very small pits. They relate something similar, if a growing and vigorous [a] tree is cut down to the ground, and its pith having been removed, it recovers.
    515. They also relate that if a citron is grafted onto a quince tree, it will have either little or no seed. It is also not far from probability that an acidic fruit, by grafting onto a stock with sweeter fruit, improves its flavor, having laid aside the harshness of its kernels and seeds.
    516. They report that not only from depithed plants, as we said, but also by repressing the medullary sap, so that it does not reach its proper place, a diversion being made to the outer parts, fruits become boneless, as by piercing a tree and inserting a wedge into it. It is true that a kinship exists between pith and pits, because the substance of both is harsh, and both occupy the middle.
    517. This also flows from common tradition, that trees which you continually irrigate with warm water will produce fruit with a small or entirely no pit. This rule also holds, that whatever divests a wild tree of its nature, endowing it with a garden and milder one, that

a] Quicke-Tree.

--- Page 352 ---
308 OF FRANCIS BACON
that same [tree] will yield fruit from a garden [variety] with a smaller stone.

Various experiments concerning the degeneration of plants and the transmutation of one into another.

518. It has been proven by frequent experience that plants degenerating from lack of cultivation become inferior within the same species; so much so sometimes that a change of species follows. To this contribute: 1. A prolonged stay in the same place, not changed frequently. 2. Dryness, unless the inherent moisture of the earth is sufficient. 3. Transplantation, and removal as it were into a more unfavorable environment, or the omission of those things which relate to the composition of the soil. Thus, through neglect, curled mint is changed into garden mint, and cabbage into turnip.
519. Any fruit grafted onto a root or shoot, if its seed is planted, will depart from its former nature. The planted stones of grapes, figs, almonds, pomegranates produce degenerate and wild fruits. Again, if you expect most fruits of the grafted kind from planted kernels or stones, you will see them degenerate. It is indeed true that peaches (as the preceding [experiments] have shown) grow more successfully from planted stones than if they are grafted; but this exception from the rule

--- Page 353 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 309**
Let the rule be, that whatever plant delights in much moisture promises better growth from a pit or kernel than if it is grafted. Although indeed the nourishment from the stock may be thinner, yet it is less [abundant], with the earth nourishing more generously.

**520.** Exceedingly old seeds, yet not entirely deprived of vigor sufficient for a plant, usually degenerate. Hence industrious Gardeners test the soundness of seeds by placing them in gently simmering water; which, within the space of an hour, if they are sound, will germinate.

**521.** It is worthy of wonder what they relate about basil, namely, that if it is exposed to too much Sun, it turns into wild thyme; although those herbs acknowledge no natural affinity. But basil is a very hot plant, with rich and succulent leaves. If this oiliness is drawn out by the enticing Sun, it seems probable that a change will arise from it.

**522.** It is an old tradition that if an oak branch is buried in the earth, a wild vine will grow from it. If we are not deceived by a fiction, the oak undoubtedly does not assume the nature of a vine, but that decaying branch imbues the earth with a quality which will produce a vine.

**523.** It is possible, and I was present at their discourse-

--- Page 354 ---
310          FRANCIS BACON
conversations, who reported as true, that
from a felled tree, the stock of which, destined for carpentry work,
sometimes produced a tree of another species, as beech (produces) linden. If what they
report is true, an explanation could be offered, that the remaining
stump from a tree stripped of its leaves,
is nourished by a scanter sap than to produce
a tree of the former kind; therefore it degenerates into something
baser, and needing less nourishment.

   § 24. Among country folk, the opinion reigns, that if
you sow wheat too often in the same land,
what grows from it will turn for the worse.

   525. It is certain that grain sown in the most barren
years is changed into another species:
   *Often in the furrows where we sowed*
      *Our great barley,*
   *Unlucky Darnel and barren Oats dominate.*
And it is a universal axiom that plants
which are to be produced by the aid of cultivation, such as
grain, are more easily changed into another species by a degenerating nature,
than those which the unbidden earth spontaneously puts forth,
whose adventitious character, brought about by cultivation, is easily
shed.

   This transmutation of plants by which species
pass into one another, is of
                                             nature.

--- Page 355 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 311
miracles of nature; since among the pronouncements of common philosophy it is held that it cannot happen; and indeed the matter requires no light labor and a scrutiny probing the innermost recesses of nature. But the opinion of impossibility is overcome by several instances drawn from experiments, so that an examination of the causes may be entered upon. Living things generated from putrefaction demonstrate a great transmutation of one into another, such as flies from grubs, etc. And it may be plausibly said that living things not born from seed can change their species. For nature, which intimately constitutes the seed, prevents the creature from deviating, as if by imposed bonds. Thus it is permissible to conclude that, since the earth produces plants without seed, a migration of those plants from species to species can occur. Therefore, since readily apparent instances are insufficient, we will endeavor to establish a method of investigation through experiments that suggest probability. And generally, we ask all readers who approach this work of Sylva Sylvarum to set aside causes for astonishment, and not to attribute to haste, as if they were raw impulses, the fact that we give place here to particulars not yet verified by experiment. For I hold the contrary opinion, namely, that such particulars possess that dignity

--- Page 356 ---
312 FRANCIS OF BACON
dignity by which experiments have hitherto prevailed,
and which have become thoroughly known; since these, from
the latter kind, as they are offered, must be
admitted; the former, by directing the investigation of
causes, sharpen it, and aid the constitution of axioms.
	526. Above all, it must be known that if you pursue
the transmutation of plants into one another, it is
necessary that the nourishment should predominate over
the seed; which in this experiment is required, being
most contrary to the nature of the herb, lest however
the faculty of growing be hindered. Let the seed also
be very weak and of minimal vigor. Therefore, it would
be advisable to plant marsh herbs on hill ridges and
in open fields: And conversely, plants which desire
much moisture, subject them to the dryness of sandy
soil; thus, let dendromalacha and sedge be transferred
to hills; conversely, let cucumber, lettuce, and
cabbage seed be planted in a sandy plain; thorn,
heather, white hellebore, fern in a marshy place.
I also establish this, that edible and garden herbs on
hill ridges become more medicinal, but less suitable
for eating than before. Perhaps also, herbs which are
wild in nature, may be changed into salads. Let this
be the first rule for transferring, as it were, substance
into another.
					527. Se-

--- Page 357 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 313

527. Let the second method be to commit a small amount of the seed of that herb, whose intended conversion is sought, to the earth mixed with other seeds, so that you may learn whether the sap of other seeds imbues the earth with such a quality that the seed, towards which the intention of imitation is directed, is altered. For example, let purslane seed be sown mixed with lettuce seed, or lettuce with purslane, or basil among thyme seed. Let a change of taste or anything else be observed. But you will do best if you wrap it in a small linen cloth and exclude the foreign seed from that whose change you are preparing.

528. The third method is the preparation of the earth by mixing crushed or otherwise comminuted plants, whether in leaf or in root. For example, mix crushed cabbage leaves into the earth, into which you place tall thistles or parsnips. Thus, cast fennel into earth prepared with crushed marjoram, oregano, or wild thyme, etc. In this operation, a continuous process of nature will exist (as I indeed believe), not because the herb to be changed will be nourished by the sap of the foreign plant (for I rejected that in the preceding sections), but the matter will pass into a new confection of the composite earth [a]; from which perhaps the seed may be altered, the species of the former herb not persisting.

O 529. Quar-

[a] of Mould.

--- Page 358 ---
314      FRANCIS BACON
529. Fourth, let it be observed what kind of herbs uncultivated earth produces. Take a small portion of this [earth] and place it in a pot or vessel, scattering upon it the seed to be altered. For example, take any earth from the roots of walls, or similar, which nourishes nettles most abundantly, entirely rejecting the fibers or roots of the nettle. Let that [earth] placed in the pot receive hoary and yellow stock-gillyflowers, or scatter their seeds into it; observe the outcome, whatever it may be. Or transfer some earth prepared for spontaneously producing fungi (the following [sections] will give some instances of this topic) into a pot, for comparing with purslane or lettuce. For these experiments make it probable that soil of simple nourishment will effect an alteration in the new seed.
530. Fifth, that a herb may pursue an order contrary to its own nature. As if you cause herbs notable for their lowliness to grow upwards, such as chamomile, wild thyme, for example; or apply green strawberries to fixed sticks, as hops are accustomed to creep up poles, and carefully observe the outcome.
531. Sixth, that plants withdrawn from the sun and open air may grow; this strongly alters nature and induces a change in the seed.
                                                                 Thus

--- Page 359 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. *Century VI.* 315
Thus plant the earth placed in a jar, which you may set at the bottom of a pond, or in a large hollowed-out tree. Let it also be tried what would happen if hollow objects are planted, or if pots with seeds previously entrusted to them are suspended in wells at some distance from the water's surface.

*Various experiments concerning the height, and the art of making dwarf trees.*

532. It is certain that cultivated trees in groves grow more upright, and with branches less luxuriant in their lower parts, than those which occupy fields. The reason is, because there is a natural movement in plants to enjoy the Sun. Moreover, they are not saturated with excessive nourishment, the forest drawing part of it to itself, repletion always being harmful to stature. Finally, they are kept warm, which is a great factor for the height of plants.
533. Trees by their nature very warm (and their inflammable gum shows their warmth), such as fir and pine, are carried upwards by spontaneous growth until they have filled the top, with no branches on the side detracting anything from this. The reason is partly in the warmth, partly in the thinness of the sap, O 2. both-

--- Page 360 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S

both prerogatives transmitting sap upwards. Juniper is only a shrub, nor of such thickness as to be able to contribute to tallness.

534. It is reported that good and strong hemp, if spread upon a tree that grows low shoots, when it begins to send out its own shoots, will render the tree dwarf and spread it out. The reason is manifest, because every plant proportions its growth to the capacity of the place.

535. The source from which trees grow are either roots or a kernel. If you place their shoots in the earth (as is permitted in some, especially the mulberry), some of them will sprout; but (as they say) the trees will be low. The reason is, because a shoot does not draw nourishment as strongly as either a root or a kernel.

536. Every plant, rapidly pushing forth sap, has a body not proportioned to its length, and therefore they are twisted or wandering, like ivy, bryony, hop, honeysuckle, when the art of trees

--- Page 361 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 317

Various experiments concerning the rudiments and growths of plants, or [a] superfetation in plants.
[a] superplants.

The Sacred Scriptures relate that Solomon wrote a natural history from the cedar in Lebanon to the moss growing in the valley, as the best versions have it. And it is true that moss is only the rudiment of a plant, as it were, the mould of the earth or of bark.

537. Moss is produced especially on houses covered with tiles or thatch, and on the extremities of walls, which presents a clear and pleasant greenness. It grows on slopes, because just as water and moisture generate moss, so it also desires flowing, not stagnant, water. The growth on walls or tiles is due to the dryness of the place, whose moisture, because it is not sufficient for producing a plant, germinates by pushing out moss. Although if, softened by age or other causes, they disintegrate, they sometimes produce plants, such as pellitory, and almost every moss has a tiny stem, besides the hairs and fibers in its lower part.

538. Moss grows in walks, especially those exposed to cold and facing north, as in various open pergolas. Again, if they are frequently trodden upon,

--- Page 362 ---
318 OF FRANCIS BACON
upon, or are first sprinkled with sand. For
wherever plants are suppressed, the earth
produces moss.
    539. In old soil, which has long lacked
cultivation, moss grows. Therefore, farmers
cultivate fields if they are covered with moss,
and work them for one or two years. The
reason is the same, for the scarcer and dying
sap of the earth, not sufficient for producing
plants, brings forth moss.
    540. Aging trees produce more moss
than young ones, because the sap is not so
vigorous as to entirely go into the branches,
but as if wearied on the way, it stops, and is
spent on producing moss.
    541. A field near springs shows moss,
—— _Mossy springs._
The reason is, because springs, while drawing
sap from the surrounding soil, leave behind
sufficient moisture for producing moss, also
aided by the coldness of the water.
    542. Moss attached to trees is like hair;
nor is it anything other than an excretion of
tree sap, not assimilated; which in large trees
takes the form of foliage.
    543. Trees more saturated with moisture
are rarely covered with moss, as shown by
aspens, poplars, willows, beeches, etc. of which
                                                                    thing

--- Page 363 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 319
the reason for which, partly already stated, namely the free propulsion of sap into the branches, and partly because the barks of these trees gape in smaller spaces; and are less rough with inequalities than oaks or ashes, so that the sap's exit is more difficult.
544. In clayey soil, moss covers all fruit-bearing trees, both on the body and trunk, as well as the branches, partly from the coldness of the earth, from which they also grow less; partly from its stickiness and viscosity, compressing the sap, and restricting the freedom of distribution, which we otherwise use, through impeded ascent.
545. We said above that leathery trees become sterile and collect moss, and that this defect is cured by splitting (the bark), etc. Therefore, by the nature of contraries, if trees are bound with ropes, or whatever binds is applied externally, moss will abound. Which I think happens to those trees that are exposed bare and open to cold winds. It would be worth trying, if a tree stripped of its bark at the top were covered to some depth, whether it would produce more moss. My mind also suggests that trees irrigated with cold water from springs are very densely covered with moss.
546. Moss is found, preparing kindling...
O 4

--- Page 364 ---
320        FRANCIS BACON'S
for those using it, which the apple tree produces, with an excellent
smell. Inquire particularly into the reason
for its growth and its nature; and for the sake
of this experiment, considering the worth of the labor,
I have proposed these latter points concerning
multiplying and increasing moss.
    The next place after moss we
assign to fungi, a plant existing below perfection.
A twofold property commends fungi: both that they are
delicacies for the table, and that they are of very rapid
growth, which, namely, a single night produces, yet not sown. Hence
those who are suddenly the architects of their own fortune are
ignominiously called mushrooms. It is
therefore necessary that they arise from abundant moisture, and indeed
from that which is rich, thick, and little concocted.
It is found that fungi cause that stomach ailment
which they call incubus. Wherefore,
ingested too eagerly, they suffocate and kill with
poison. Whence it is argued that they are flatulent;
and that flatulence is thick and causes swelling, not
sharp and biting. Which reason also makes fungi
pleasing to the offspring of Venus.
    547. They report that the bark of white or
black poplar (those among trees are especially
low-growing), cut into small pieces and inserted into
well-manured furrows, disposes the earth for
producing, at any time of the year,
                                                                fungi

--- Page 365 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 321
for edible fungi. Others add to the mixture
bread yeast dissolved in water.
548. They also report that stubble frequently
remaining on hills in the field, if set on
fire in rainy weather, produces a great
abundance of fungi.
549. It is also rumored that from deer
horn scraped or cut into minute parts, mixed
with dung and irrigated, fungi grow. For it is
known that deer horn consists of a fatty
and viscous substance; perhaps ox horn would
also produce the same.
550. They report, but for credibility, let the
author be called upon, that ivy was born from
deer horn, and they determine that this happens
rather from horn rubbed against ivy, than from
the horn itself. No substance has hitherto become
known besides earth, and its products (such as
tiles, stones, etc.) from which moss and grassy
substance grows. An experiment can be made
with seeds, such as fennel, mustard,
turnips, inserted into holes prepared in deer
or ox horn, to explore whether they grow into
a sprout.
551. There is also another imperfect
plant, similar to a large fungus, and which
sometimes expands like a cap (they call it a
poisonous fungus), but it is unfit for eating, and
usually grows on the trunk of a dead tree.
O 5 sists,

--- Page 366 ---
**FRANCIS BACON**

...it grows, and also on the roots of trees consumed by decay. From which it seems to receive sap from rotten wood; which is incidentally shown to yield vital moisture.

552. There is found a flat growth, which the outer parts of a dead tree produce, still lacking a name. It is large, crimson in color, hard and fibrous. Which argues that not even dead trees are entirely sterile; just as nails and hairs are accustomed to grow for a time from a human corpse.

553. There is found a pod or follicle, usually accustomed to grow in fields. At first, equaling in hardness a palm-sized ball, it whitens, afterwards it degenerates into a fungous color, and with the circumference of its outermost skin it covers a fine powder, which, when broken, it reveals. It is thought to be harmful to the eyes if they perceive the powder, but a remedy for chilblains; perhaps consisting of a corrosive and pungent nature.

554. A plant, called by the English 'Jew's ear' (it is a species of fungus), which grows on the roots and on the lower parts of the body of trees; especially of the Elder, and sometimes of the Ash. Its nature is remarkable, since it swells and greatly expands in hot water. Its color is not green, but darkly blackish; its use is in angina and inflammations of the throat, so that by its softening virtue...

--- Page 367 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 323.
so that it appears to possess the power of softening and soothing.
555. In the genus of excrescences, there is a certain spongy one, which primarily grows on the roots of laserwort; also sometimes on cedar and other trees. It is very white, light, and friable, and is called agaric. Medicine praises it for expelling viscous and tenacious phlegm, and it is notably conducive to deobstructing the spleen. Harmful to the stomach, at first sweet to the taste, afterwards bitter.
556. No plant [a. Super-Plant] superfoetates or grows on trees so as to assume the form of a plant, except [b. Mistletoe] that of mistletoe. It is from the storehouse of vanity that a bird is found, by the name of [c. Mistle-Bird] vesicaria or thrush, which feeds on a seed that it often cannot digest, and so, when it expels it whole with its excrements, that [seed], falling into the cleft branches of a tree, produces mistletoe. But it is a fable, since it exceeds belief that birds are nourished by that which they cannot digest. Even if that be granted, however, other things stand in the way of probability. For first, it is found only on certain trees, which lack the enticement of fruits, so that a bird resting there would not be nourished. Perhaps it delights in [d. Mistletoe-Berries] mistletoe berries, so that it is often found there for that reason; and which also [is part] of a fig-
O 6 ment

--- Page 368 ---
324          OF FRANCIS BACON
I think is the origin of the fiction. But what is
conclusive in this case, mistletoe also grows beneath the
branches, not merely above.
Therefore, there is no reason for us to suppose that anything has
fallen into the branches. Mistletoe grows especially
on the wild apple, the garden apple, sometimes
also on hazel, rarely on oaks; the
mistletoe of which is considered very medicinal,
with its greenness intact through winter and summer,
producing a splendidly whitish berry:
so much so that it is entirely different from the plant
on which it grows. Two things therefore can be established
as if beyond doubt: both that the superfetation occurs
from an abundance of sap in the branch which
produces it, and that that sap is such as the tree
excretes, so that it cannot otherwise assimilate
what is to be insinuated into the branch. Moreover, it seems
fatter and more unctuous than the common sap of trees;
as appears from the berry, which, being glutinous,
remains green all summer and winter, while the tree
itself does not.
   557. This experiment, concerning mistletoe,
is a light-bringer for other things. Therefore, it could
be attempted by cutting a branch of a wild apple
tree in the bark, and irrigating the wound
daily with warm water mixed with dung,
to explore whether it produces mistletoe or a plant of viscum
or something similar. But it would be better to make
the experiment by irrigation or anointing which to the
                                                               tree

--- Page 369 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Cent. VI. 325
less natural to the tree than water, such as oil,
yeast, etc., provided that they are such things which
do not kill the tree.

558. It will be profitable to have observed what from
plants will germinate, if to the growing branches
an obstacle is placed. Therefore, the top of a cut
tree, with mud drawn over to some
depth, cover. My
concept concerning this matter persuades me that nascent
roots [will form], which even shoots inserted into mud produce.
Therefore, in this experiment, a covering must be applied very tightly to the
tree, from those things which are
less, than mud, suitable to the nature of the
plant. Let it be tried with leather, cloth, white lead, if
harmless to the tree. It is certain that a fern has been
found to grow out of a tree [a] deprived of branches.

559. Thorns of trees also form
a kind of excrescence, when they do not grow into branches or
leaves. Plants armed with thorns on their
branches are white and black thorn, bramble, rose,
citron apple, wild apple, [b] gooseberry,
barberry. Those which are thorny on their leaves are,
Holly, Juniper, [c] Hawthorn,
thistle. Nettle is armed with a slender and poisonous
sting; as borage, with a harmless one. The cause
is, the swiftness of growth, lack of moisture,

[a] out of a Pollard. [b] Goose-Berry. [c] Whin-bush.

--- Page 370 ---
326          FRANCIS BACON
ris, and the tight compression of the bark. For the spirit, hastening germination, not providing sufficient nourishment for the branch to put forth, and the bark being too tight, render the branches thorny. Hence also they taper to a point in the manner of a pyramid, the moisture being consumed, namely, where it has slightly protruded. The propulsion of too much sap into the leaves, rather than it being distributed equally into the leaf, makes the leaves thorny. Therefore, a roughness is present in them, as in borage, nettle. The leaves of the Holly are smooth, not flat, but as it were wrinkled, for the same reason.
     560. Some plants, not thorny, have something akin to bark in their leaves, being downy and shaggy, such as thryallis, arboreal hoary stock, coltsfoot. Their stickiness comes from a subtle spirit in a soft and fatty substance. For it is certain that hoary stock and thryallis, when bruised, have been applied with good success to the wrists of those suffering from tertian or quartan fever. The vapor of coltsfoot is potent in virtue to heal the lungs. The leaf also consolidates in Surgery.
     561. Another kind of excrescence is the exudation of plants, combined with putrefaction, as is evident in oak galls, which pre-

--- Page 371 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI.      327
especially they are found in oak leaves, and in willows. Farmers have devised
for themselves a prognostication, that if oak apples teem
with worms inside, it is a sign of a future year infamous for
plague. Nor is it improbable, because they arise from corruption.
   562. The growth of the dog-rose or another briar bears a slender tip or a small
brush of moss of various colors, which, when cut
open, are found to teem with small and white worms.

   *Various experiments concerning the pro-*
      *duction of perfect plants*
               *without seed.*

   563. It is not disputed that earth from the foundations of vaulted work or
buildings, from the bottoms of wells, when transferred into
pots, will produce new species of herbs, but with the intervention
of a proper interval of time before it germinates. For if it is
taken to the depth of an ell, hidden beneath the earth,
it will be fertile in the first year; but if you collect it pressed
down deeper, it will not be fertile until after a space of one
or two years.
   564. The nature of the plants which the earth taken from those
places produces imitates and reflects [*a*] the nature of the clod itself,
                                             if the clod is purer

a] *follovv the Nature of the Mould it ſelfe.*

--- Page 372 ---
328       FRANCISCI BACONI
purer and softer, gives soft herbs, such as
grass, plantain, and similar ones. But if it
is hard and barren, it nourishes rough ones, such as
thistle, fir, etc.
      565. It is a common experiment that in
walks paved with thick sand, the earth
in the first year shows [a] knotty grass,
afterwards, [b] spiked grass. The cause is
the hardness of the gravel or stones first laid down,
which do not allow the grass to rise up,
but twist it, so that it comes out wherever a way is given.
But when the surface of the earth is relaxed a little,
common grass emerges.
      566. They say that from the earth of a shady
and watery wood, dug out to some depth
and placed in earthen vessels, there come forth
fat and succulent herbs, such as [c] moneywort,
purslane, sedum, pennyroyal, etc.
      567. Moreover, plants are also born in water
with roots not fixed in the bottom; but
they are of the less perfect kind, since
most

--- Page 373 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 329**
...it grows thicker with thyme-like foliage, but is of a more vivid green, and produces a slender fiber beneath the waters, but far removed from the bottom. The water lily relies on its root. Moreover, there is a large number of herbs growing in lakes.

568. It is confirmed by the testimonies of the Ancients and Moderns that the surface of the sea exhibits certain herbs, which they believe originate from solidified aquatic mud, where the sun's heat reigns most intensely, and the movement of the sea is altogether slow. Seaweed and eryngium are rooted, but the former underwater, the latter on the shore.

569. It was observed by the ancients that herbs sprout from strongly compacted and putrefied snow, and all were found to be bitter. Among them, the one called *flomus* was of particular esteem. It is certain that worms not unlike earthworms are usually found in snow; from which it would not be improbable that plants could arise from it.

570. The ancients assert that herbs are born from stones. That this can happen is shown by what is admitted as undoubted, namely, that toads have sometimes been found in the middle of a cut stone [a]. Flints also, when thrown onto the earth, collect moss and pellitory, and other
                                flowers

a] of a Free-Stone.

--- Page 374 ---
330       FRANCIS BACON'S
flowers grow on walls. But whether it be common
brick or stone, or from mud and cracks, a more
accurate observation has not yet taught. For they have
noted that Elder and Ash sometimes grow from
[a] the walls of towers, since it is an uncontro-
vertible truth that they grow from fissures; so much
so that as they thicken, the stone splits itself,
making way. Moreover, it is doubted whether this is
due to cement, or whether birds do not scatter seeds.
Rocks also grow grass; but I think such herbs are
found where the earth decays. It is also found that
large trees growing in quarries have pressed their roots
into the stones.
  571. They report that German mines at the bottom
teem with plants, and the workmen assert that some
magical power is present, which does not allow them
to be gathered.
  572. Sea sand blooms with rare plants. Some of the
ancients attribute this to the Sun, which seizes the
moisture through exhalations, before it is incorporated
into the earth and can nourish the plant. They testify
that the roots in sand are always fixed in mud, and
that no veins of sand are found if you proceed to some
depth from the surface.
  573. It is truly reported that certain plants
germinating for a time, live on their own
                                        sustenance.

  a] out of Steeples.

--- Page 375 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 331
sap, without the aid of external nourishment which earth, water, stone, etc. might supply. Concerning this matter, see Experiment 29.

Various experiments concerning foreign plants.

574. It is reported that earth from the Indian climate and distant regions, exported for ballasting a ship to some soil in Italy, produced exotic herbs unknown to Europeans. Also, from their roots, barks, and seeds crushed together, and mixed with other earth, and thoroughly irrigated with warm water, herbs not dissimilar to others arise.
575. Plants transplanted from warm regions and transported to others struggle in pushing out their shoots at the time proper to their own climate. Therefore, so that harm may be averted, nothing more is required than that they be safe against the injury of retardation from cold. It also stands by historical record that grains from warm soil, when transferred to colder soil, surpass in precocity the common grains of colder earth. It is probable that the success of the experiment will be better with grain than with trees, since grains are only annual, from which the virtue of the seed does not con-

--- Page 376 ---
332      FRANCIS OF VERULAM
is consumed, when in a tree it (the virtue) degenerates from the soil from which it was transplanted into the soil it now inhabits.
   576. Many plants, which the air of a milder climate nurtures, having experienced the harshness of a more rigid one, will nevertheless sprout towards the end of spring, with the bud intact for the greater part of summer, as the seed of the orange, lemon, etc., demonstrates. Their seeds, cast into the ground at the end of April, will yield most pleasing [a] salads, with other herbs mixed in. Nor do I doubt that the seed of the clove, or pepper, etc., if it could be had green here at the time of sowing, would prove the same.

   *Various Experiments concerning the seasons in which plants grow.*

   577. Of flowers, grains, and fruits, some are early, others late. Among flowers with us, early ones are: primrose, violets, anemones, [a] marsh asphodels, spring crocus, some tulips; all of which are cold, and therefore, as it seems, they grow, perceiving the sun's heat more keenly than warm herbs; just as a cold hand perceives the slightest heat more quickly than a warm one. Next to these are pellitory, mullein, hyacinth, rosemary
                                             flowers.

   a] *Sallets.*

--- Page 377 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 333**
of rosemary, etc. After those, speedwell, rose, sweet flag, etc. The latest are carnations, garden mallow, delphinium, etc. The earliest flowers are those of the peach tree, almond tree, dogwood, [a] mezereon, etc. Whatever these trees produce, they swell greatly with both watery and oily moisture. Therefore, the spring crocus, since it is a herb with oily sap, is early. For the sun affects these sooner than drier trees. These are the grades of grains: rye and wheat, oats, barley, peas, beans; for although beans and peas, when green, are made fit for eating earlier, yet when dry, as fodder for horses, we see them ripen very late; fatty grains being less prone to such early ripening. The earliest fruits are strawberries, cherries, gooseberries, currants; then apples, and pears, early apricots, raspberries. Next are Damson plums, and most species of plums and peaches, etc. Lastly are apples, winter pears, grapes, nuts, quinces, almonds, wild plums, dog-rose berries, hops, medlars, service-berries, dogwood berries.
578. It is to be noted that trees whose maturity is late, generally flower earlier, as proven by the peach tree, dogwood, wild plum—

a] Mezerions.

--- Page 378 ---
334          FRANCIS BACON'S
wild plum, almond, etc. And here shines forth the
industry of nature, wisely administering its own
affairs, in that these trees send forth early flowers, since
otherwise the effective heat of the Sun could not accompany them to full
maturity.
     579. Of certain fruits there is a double,
but rare, yield; to this category refer some pears,
strawberries, etc. These are of the kind that are
more fully nourished; by which it happens that, a
period being completed before the Sun's heat too
much languishes, they can complete another.
From violet flowers, they are reborn twice in one year,
especially the double white ones; and
this plant abounds in moisture. A similar
fecundity is observed in roses, but without neglecting
pruning, as we heard before.
     580. Although Muscovy allows grain
to grow only in late spring, yet their
harvest equals our ripeness. The reason is, that the scattered snow
compresses the vigor of the earth, and we have learned by
experience that long winters among us contribute to
the fertility of the year; after which have passed, flowers
and grain, both early and late, almost
simultaneously produce a yield, whence
often trouble for farmers. For the same time
offers red and Damask roses to be seen,
and the harvest of wheat and barley
coincides. But usually it happens that
                                                            pre-

--- Page 379 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 335
earlier ones, as if waiting for the later ones, [a] coincide, not truly that those of slower growth are accelerated.
581. A milder climate of the earth nourishes various fruit-bearing trees, which yield tender and ripe fruits, with a continuous fertility succeeding each other in turns for almost the entire year. They attribute almost the same to the orange tree with us for a large part of summer, as also to the fig. And indeed, nature, directing the movements of plants, tends towards this. But because they are either deprived of absorbing sap or are retarded by the oppressive cold of winter, therefore only succulent plants in a warm soil complete this period of successive maturity.
582. Some herbs are only annual, and in this cycle of time they completely die with their roots, such as borage, lettuce, cucumbers, [b] muskmelons, basil, tobacco, mustard seed, and every kind of grain. Others persist intact for several years, such as hyssop, germander, lavender, fennel, &c. The reason why they die is twofold; the first is the tenderness or weakness of the seed, of narrow vitality, as appears in borage, lettuce, cucumber, grain, &c.

a] Earlier staieth for the Later.
b] Muske-Melons.

--- Page 380 ---
336 FRANCIS BACON
etc. And therefore none of these are warm: the second, that certain herbs are affected by the slightest cold, such as basil, mustard seed, and all those that thrive on heat.

\*Various Experiments concerning the duration of herbs or trees.\*

583. Durability is most conspicuous in those which have the largest body, such as oaks, elms, chestnuts, [a] the lotus tree, etc. But this concerns trees; for in herbs the opposite often holds true: since borage, cabbage, melons, though of quite vast bulk, are of short duration, and hyssop, savory, germander, thyme, sage remain intact for a long time. The reason is, because the vitality of trees depends on the measure of their vigor and the quantity of their sap, being otherwise sufficiently protected by the circuit of their bark against injuries from the air. Herbs, however, are nourished by languid sap, armed with soft bark, and those which excel in longer life are of pungent odor and woody stem.
584. Nut-bearing trees surpass fruit-bearing ones in the prerogative of durability; especially those whose fruits are more moist; such as oak, beech, chestnut, walnut, almond,

a] *the Loat-Tree.*

--- Page 381 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 337
almond, pine, etc., surpass
apple, pear, plum, etc. in durability. The cause is
the fatness and oiliness of the sap, which resists
consumption more than watery [sap].
585. Trees which leaf out later,
and shed their leaves later, surpass in longevity those
for which leaves sprout and fall earlier. The cause is,
because slower production indicates a more fixed moisture,
the other a more loose, and more easily dissolvable [moisture]:
the same reason holds, why wild trees
live longer than garden trees;
and in the same species, those with sour fruits,
than those with sweet [fruits].
586. Nothing contributes as much
to prolonging the life of trees, thorns, and herbs
as frequent pruning, which, as often
as it is repeated, renews the plant's sap so that
it does not luxuriate so widely spread out, nor grow so languidly,
as if it had lacked pruning;
so much so that plants accustomed to living for a year, if
timely cutting is not interrupted,
and if their use is more sparing, and they are allowed
to grow continuously, they will exceed a year in vitality;
as noted in part. Such are,
lettuce, purslane, cucumber, and similar [plants].
Luxuriant trees are situated in cemeteries or the
ruins of buildings, with branches so dense and
dwarf-like.
P 587. Other-

--- Page 382 ---
338 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OF FRANCIS BACON

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;587. By some experiment, an artificial
longevity of plants could be attempted beyond
that which the native period of each en-
compasses; for example, if you wish to make
a stalk of wheat last for the space of an entire year. We
always presuppose that it must be treated in such a way
as to escape the danger of a killing winter;
since our discussion remains within the prolongation
of the life given by nature. I hold, as an
axiom to be admitted, that whatever makes
a tree late contributes to longevity.
It would be expedient to make an experiment with a shaded
stalk of wheat, and with a surrounding
wooden receptacle not touching its
straw, so that the publicly circulating air may be excluded.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Concerning the preservation of fruits and plants,
both on the tree or stalk and when plucked,
we will treat under the title "On the preserva-
tion of bodies."

*Various Experiments concerning various*
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;*Figures of Plants.*

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;588. We leave the particular figures of plants
to descriptions specifically occupied
with them, contenting ourselves generally with the established
observations of those who specialize in that field.
Trees and herbs, in producing branches, do not
have a definite shape, nor do they follow an order.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Cause

--- Page 383 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 339
The cause is, because the sap repressed in the bark
does not burst forth at once (as in the bodies
or trunks of trees or the stalks of herbs)
until they put forth branches; and when they
burst forth, they emerge by chance, by whatever way
is given in the bark. It is true, that some
come forth with more dispersed branches, as is customary for the holm oak,
winter pear, quince apple, medlar,
citrus; some are tapered into a more exact pyramid
and rise to a [a] boss at the end, as the pear
(whose origin critics derive from πῦρ, fire),
orange tree, fir, service trees,
lime trees, citron tree; some are more expanded,
as the beech, [b] hornbeam, &c.
the others behave more indifferently. The cause why they thus dis-
perse their branches, is the hurried eruption of sap,
from which they do not produce a body of proper
height, but with branches wandering about the ground.
The cause of the pyramid (shape), is the repression of sap long
before it sends out branches, and its consumption at an equal
rate as soon as they emerge.
Dispersion comes from sap abundantly carried upwards
without consumption, and is simultaneously hurried
without interruption.
589. Herbs, but not trees, are found,
which could be said to observe an or-
                                 P 2                      der

a] *and come almost to todd.*
b] *Hornebeame.*

--- Page 384 ---
340      FRANCIS BACON
order in producing leaves; being distinguished by joints and nodes, with as many obstacles to germination, demanding turns to advance themselves, such as the simple-flowered carnation, fennel, grain, reeds, canes. The cause is the unequal ascent of sap, so that, as if delayed by obstacles in the way, it stops. They also seem to harden with a more tightly compacted stem, whence there is an impediment to the sap tending upwards, until it has collected itself into a node, from which it emerges more compressed and is urged to put forth. Hence most of them are hollow, with a dry stem, such as fennel, straw, reed.

      590. In all flowers there is a precise shape; whose number does not exceed four or five, such as primroses, dog-rose flowers, simple-flowered musk-roses and such carnations, etc., which consist of five petals; lilies, [a] Irises, borage flowers, bugloss, etc., which have four [petals]; some produce innumerable flowers, but small ones, such as calendula, trefoil. We also see [b] the sockets and supporters [c] by which flowers are sustained, to be shaped, such as the five outer
                                                            leaves

      a] Flower-de-luces.
      b] that the Sockets, and Supporters of Flowers.
      c] As in the Five Brethren of the Rose.

--- Page 385 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 341
three grassy ones by which the rose flower is enclosed before the germination of the pink's bud. There are also leaves, some round in shape, others oblong, none square, many serrated or jagged at their extremities; such shapes are rare in flowers. For I believe the [a] jagging of Pinkes corresponds to the unevenness of leaves in the oak, vine, and similar plants. But these rarely, or rather never, [b] have any small Purles.

**Various Experiments concerning the Principal Differences of Plants.**

591. Few plants flower before they leaf out, such as the almond, peach tree, dogwood, blackthorn, etc., but for most, the leaves precede the flowers, as shown by the apple, pear, plum, cherry, hawthorn, etc. The cause, in those where the flowers precede, is an acrid spirit (therefore they usually produce fruit earlier in springtime, but whose maturity is later, like most of the aforementioned particulars) or an oily sap, more apt for producing leaves than flowers.
592. Some plants do not lose their greenness throughout winter; others lose their leaves. Those

[a] the jagging of Pinkes.
[b] have any small Purles.

--- Page 386 ---
342 FRANCIS BACON'S
ter bear the winter with uninjured greenness, are the holm oak,
ivy, boxwood, fir, yew, cypress, ju-
niper, laurel, rosemary. The cause of their complete greenness
is the denser and more compact substance of their leaves, and of their stalks. The cause of
which again is the tenacious and viscous sap, or vigor, of the plant, and their heat.
Of the former kind is the holm oak, whose sap is of such
viscosity that birdlime is prepared from its bark. The stem of ivy is tenacious, nor of that fra-
gility which we experience in other small shrubs. The fir provides pitch: the wood of the boxwood
is solid and heavy; which globes demonstrate.
The yew consists of strong and flexible
wood, as proved by the bows which are made from it. Of the second kind is the Juniper, with fra-
grant wood, strongly intensifying the heat of fire. The wood of the laurel is also warm and aromati-
c. So too does rose-
mary behave among shrubs. The density of the leaves
is caused by smoothness and splendor, as in the
laurel, and holm oak, boxwood, etc., or by hardness coiling into a spiral, as in the others. An attempt could
be made at grafting rosemary, laurel, or boxwood onto the
trunk of a holm oak, since these plants endure the winter whole. It would also be worthwhile
to try the grafting of other trees,
whether fruit-bearing or wild ones are chosen, so that it may be observed, namely, whether the fruit

--- Page 387 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 343
...fruit or late leaves extend into a more advanced winter, because the ilex for the most part retains its own through winter. Perhaps [a] chamælea, transferred by grafting onto an ilex or holly, might become larger and more precocious.

593. In some plants, although there are flowers, fruits are nevertheless not wanting; and conversely, in others you would seek both in vain. Most larger timber trees, such as oak, beech, etc., do not bloom with a conspicuous flower. Also, few fruit-bearing trees, such as mulberry, walnut, etc., and some shrubs, such as juniper, ilex, do not produce flowers. Various herbs produce seeds, equivalent to fruits, but not flowers, such as purslane, etc. Those which are clothed neither with flower nor with fruit are altogether few, such as the double cherry, willow, etc. But concerning the cherry, it is doubted whether this is not the work of art or cultivation. If art reigns here, it could be tried what it might achieve in doubling the flowers of apple and other fruits. Those which are deprived of both flower and fruit are not many, such as elm, poplar, boxwood, fern, etc.

594. There are some which are continuously carried upwards by growth, and are sustained by themselves, such as those which are larger among trees and plants. Others creep on the ground, onto trees...

a] Mezerion-Tree.

--- Page 388 ---
344 OF FRANCIS BACON
...trees or props, being too weak to stand upright by themselves, like the vine, ivy, bramble, white bryony, honeysuckle or honeysuckle, hop, clematis, chamomile, etc. for the reason partly already stated, that all plants naturally strive upwards in ascent. But if the sap is pushed upwards too quickly, the trunk becomes slender, unequal to bearing the weight, whence in this last kind, the quickness of growth.

*Various Experiments concerning the Method*
*of Composition and Improvement of Soils.*

595. That which first presents itself and is the most common aid, is manuring. In goodness, sheep dung surpasses others; cow dung holds second place; horse dung is held in third place, but its heat must be tempered by mixture. Pigeon dung especially benefits the garden, and is applied in moderate measure to the soil. The method of manuring that comes into use is this: that the earth accustomed to be turned by the plough should receive the scattered dung immediately before ploughing or sowing, and thus be covered by ploughing. For if it is cast long before over the fields, the Sun boils away much of the richness. If the land is pasture, scatter it somewhat later and near winter, so that it languishing
                                                               cens

--- Page 389 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 345
...the languishing heat of the Sun may dry it out less. Concerning composition which specifically relates to horticulture (as concerning a heated bed, etc.) [a] we have spoken before.

596. Another method is to sprinkle various earths, such as marl, lime, sea sand, marsh earth, earth added on top of earth, and to temper them by mixing them variously. Marl is recommended by its richness and a heat that is moderate between extremes. Next is sea sand, to which, without doubt, there is some prerogative of virtue from salt, the rudiment of life. Lime somewhat burns the earth too much; so that it is more suitable for cold-loamy or wet places. But I was present at the discussions of very experienced farmers, when he said that those commonly err who think lime is beneficial to arable land, but not to pasture, since it is profitable both for grass and for grain. But that the error was occasioned by the fact that land worked with lime, with varied and uninterrupted [b] produce, they wear out and exhaust, so that afterwards, when exhausted, it provides only sparingly for grass. It would be useful to try what would happen, if land about to undergo plowing receives lime a little before it is worked, which is then treated like manure. But P 5 opor-

a] Exper. 401. & 2.
b] by many Crops is tired out.

--- Page 390 ---
346 FRANCIS BACON'S
that rain has made it friable, or that it has lain [a] fallow; cloddy earth [b] turning itself around: for I remember a remarkable garden, to which ground was as if heaped upon; in the first year of planting it produced fruits excellently, since the surface of the earth is generally most fertile; which is doubled by such preparation. But I am entirely convinced, if without great expenses it can be brought about that the earth abounds with saltpeter, it will be the best. The method of accelerating the production of saltpeter, is that the Sun be kept away, and an obstacle be placed for sprouting vegetables. Therefore if with a covering, somewhat enclosing the earth, you place a covering of straw, or with boards you cover the earth, the ground will give saltpeter. From marshy or riverine earth the best composition is made, if especially the marsh has not been cleared for a long time, lest the water be too barren. I add, and if lime is mixed in with it, it will be a help.
  597. The third method of correcting soil is from other substances, which are impregnated with the power of fertilizing, although it is not mere earth. Here ashes excel; so much so that the region surrounding Etna and Vesuvius com-

  a] Lying.
  b] Compaſſeth it Selfe.

--- Page 391 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 347
compensates in a certain way for the losses of frequent eruptions, [a] *have made them, a kinde of Amends.* by the rare benignity of the soil, which the ashes scattered here and there generate. Soot not thickly scattered through the field or garden, yields a proven composition. Salt also, but the price hinders it. Experience has taught however that mixed with seed grain and sown together, it is beneficial. I hold this opinion, that lime reduced to ash and added to seed grain could be beneficial, perhaps like lime scattered over the earth. Concerning the soaking of seeds in various mixtures with water so that they may gather vigor, or concerning the irrigation of the earth by composed waters, [b] *Exper. 402. &c.* we have spoken before.

598. The fourth remedy for correcting the earth is, if you allow plants to rot in the earth, and by that means enrich it; such as grain stalks, especially of peas. Ferns thrown into the earth when winter first sets in, bring about fertility. It would be expedient to make an experiment whether heaped tree leaves, mixed with lime or dung, so that their vigor may be intensified, would combine into a good composition, since nothing is held in such neglect and perishes, than
P 6 fron-

--- Page 392 ---
348          FRANCIS BACON
tree leaves. However, as they are scattered about and do not undergo mixture, they imbue the earth with an acidic quality rather than any other.

     599. The fifth aid to the earth is heat. The ancients gave dry stubble, ferns, and sedges to the wind sweeping flames through the field and earth to be burned. Heat also from walls and receptacles contributes to improvement. Earth also facing south collects advantage; just as a sheepfold is aided, namely by heat and composition. Perhaps someone might conjecture whether it is not profitable, at the approach of winter, to cover the earth with scattered ferns (which the preceding experiment suggested) so that heat may be intensified. Furthermore, there is a suspicion among some intimately skilled in the art of agriculture, that collected ferns heaped upon stony ground (a frequent practice) do not constitute approved agriculture according to the rules of the art, because they retain the earth's heat, lest it dissipate.

     600. Irrigation provides the sixth method of aiding the earth, which is twofold. One consists of timely admission and exclusion of water; which sometimes benefits when delayed for a proper period of time, but sometimes, if it stagnates excessively and remains too long, it usually harms.
                                                            But

--- Page 393 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VI. 349
But these things are done solely for the benefit of meadows, which have a river far distant. The other is, the derivation of water from lands where springs are found, down slopes into lower ground through channels, from which, when led across, the water may flow out more widely dispersed. And this drawing off creates hope of profit from a more fortunate yield of grain and grass; the more splendid, the more fertile the sloping land is, because it carries away with it something scraped off from the richness of the soil. But in whatever way it is finally viewed, it never lacks utility. Generally, where marshes and anything similar to them overflow as if by a flood of water, that overflowing through the winter increases of water provides fertility for the following summer. The reason may be, that it both preserves the heat of the earth and nourishes the earth itself. But those experienced in marshes affirm that ditches or channels should be managed thus, lest too long a stay of stagnant water generate marsh sedge and rushes. For then the land, like a grove, excludes the Sun, from which the lingering moisture causes the grass of that year not to be as desired. So much for irrigation. What pertains to avoiding and draining off an excessive quantity of water, and aids to the land in that kind, will not escape our diligence elsewhere.

*Finis libri sexti Historiæ Naturalis.*
FRAN-

--- Page 394 ---
350

[Decorative frieze with floral and scrollwork motifs]

OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM
NATURAL
HISTORY
CENTURY SEVEN.

Various experiments concerning the affinities and differences of plants and inanimate bodies.

601. [Decorative initial Q]hatever distinction there is between animate and inanimate things we will accurately consider under a heading to which we set aside a treatise on life, vital spirits, and faculties; being content here with a cursory narration. Therefore, these differences are reduced to two main points, since spirits and a pneumatic part are present in all bodies. But two things especially distinguish animate and inanimate things. The first is, that whatever spirit animates living things, flows undivided with a continuous current into veins and hidden channels, like blood; except that it does not only have its own branches, but

--- Page 395 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 351
but certain ventricles or receptacles,
the seat of the principal spirit, and to which they are, as it were,
channeled. But the spirits of inanimate things are en-
closed, and cut off from the tangible parts,
impervious to each other; as air exists in snow.
Secondly, that all spirits of animated things are
more or less kindled and have something subtle of a
flame mixed in, and in substance become airy. But
inanimate bodies nourish spirits that cannot be inflamed.
Nor does this difference denote the heat or cold
of spirits; for cloves, and other aromatics, naphtha
or petroleum consist of the hottest spirits
(far exceeding the heat of oil, wax) but not kindled;
and whatever among these temperate bodies, fostering
more languid spirits, is inflamed, becomes strongly
hot beyond others where they are not inflamed,
besides light and motion, etc.
   602. Secondary differences, and which
arise from the former as from radical ones, are these.
To all plants there is a figure from a determined
conformation, not to inanimate bodies. For note,
how far the spirit can be continuously dispersed,
nor abandons its series, so far does the
configuration proceed, and its limits from the utmost
                                       effort

--- Page 396 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S
effort. Next, plants are nourished,
but not inanimate bodies; they have accre-
tion, not alimentation.
Thirdly, the vitality of plants is enclosed
in a fixed period, which is not established for
animate bodies. Fourthly, by the secondary
propagation of individuals among themselves, plants
preserve their species; which is not observed
in inanimate bodies.
      603. Plants and metals or fossils, which
I reckon among inanimate things, besides the four
modes mentioned before, also differ in these ways. Plants
yield to metals in longevity. Secondly,
in solidity and hardness. Thirdly, the former (plants)
possess a double climate above and below ground,
while the latter (metals/fossils), being only subterranean, are
content with one.
      604. You would see few things which share
in the companionship of both natures with plants and
metals. Coral is most closely related to both species,
as is vitriol; which grows most
conveniently from moisture.
      605. Another special difference is be-
tween plants and putrefaction; that all of this
(if it does not end in desiccation) turns
into plants, or into animals accustomed to being born
from putrefaction. For it seems entirely certain to me
that moss, fungi, and agaric,
and other things of the same kind, are
                                          only

--- Page 397 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 353
...are only the offspring of earth putrefied in a certain way, or of walls, or of trees, or similar things. But flesh, fish, and plants themselves, and many other things which can be referred to here, when putrefied or corrupted, generate worms. Putrefactions which resemble the nature of plants are distinguished from these by the fact that they do not revive in successive offspring, although they are nourished and expire at their own period, nor are they entirely without form.
606. When I was enjoying the sought-after mildness of retirement for the summer quarter, I had by chance left a cut lemon in a place enclosed on all sides. When I returned, I saw hair-like tips, an inch long, grown out from the cut pith, with tiny black heads, resembling grass.

*Various experiments concerning the affin-
ity and difference of plants
and animals, and what common
ground they share.*

607. By what natural fellowship plants and animals are joined, and by what contrariety they differ from each other, the following will teach. Both send forth spirits branching out, which they protrude in a continuous flow, and possess those apt for inflammation, but those (spirits) in animals have ventricles and receptacles,

--- Page 398 ---
354        OF FRANCIS BACON
have, not in plants, as we said before [*a*].
Secondly, their spirits communicate more with flame
than those of plants.
And these are the primary differences; take the se-
condary ones. Firstly, we see plants raised in close
communion with the earth, while animals
subsist by themselves, separated from the matrix.
Secondly, animals have a locomotive
faculty, not plants. Thirdly, animals
draw nourishment from their upper parts,
especially through the mouth; plants from their lower
parts, namely the roots. Fourthly, the seed
and seminal vessels, which turn upwards,
are parts of plants; in animals,
those parts reside downwards. Wherefore not
only elegantly, but also philosophically it is said,
man is an inverted plant; for what in
plants is the root, is the head in animals.
Fifthly, animals are configured more exactly
than plants. Sixthly, there is a greater
diversity of organs within their body,
and as it were an interior conformation, than
in plants. Seventhly, they possess the faculty of sensation,
these lack it. Eighthly, animals
have spontaneous motion, of which plants
are deprived.
    608. You may not infrequently see a difference in plants based on sex.
Thus there is male and female
                                                                pæo-
  *a*] *Exp. 1. Cent. 7.*

--- Page 399 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 355
peony, male & female rosemary, male
& female holly. They cannot generate by coitus,
but what is related about the male & female palm
is very close to it; namely, that one placed near the other
inclines into mutual embraces; so much so that (which is more wonderful)
they believe, in order that the trees may grow up erect and unbent,
that they are tended by means of a rope or line, tied
and stretched from one to the other, with the help of an
intermediate body, for contact. But this last point
does not seem to deviate from fiction, or at least
to be given for the purpose of exaggerating the matter.
I am nevertheless of the opinion that such a binary
of a more potent and a more languid (nature), like male and female,
is found in all living things. Sometimes they lie hidden,
confused, so that in some born from putrefaction, marks
of diversity are clearly not expressed. Sometimes they are recognized as double,
as in hermaphrodites; but generally most species
possess some vigor.
   609. The things that join plants and animals by some
natural affinity are these: that they exist as fixed (things),
and lack local motion, although they have some in their parts,
like oysters, snails, and similar things. It is from a fable
what they relate, that in the Northern regions a plant grows
in the form of a lamb, is nourished by grass, so much so that it around
                                             itself consumes

--- Page 400 ---
356      OF FRANCIS BACON
it consumes itself. I would think that from the shape
of the plant is the origin of the fable; as we know there is
also [a] satyrion resembling bees in its flowers,
&c. As for the grass, the plant seems,
supported by a very large stem, and a large
top, to feed on that for some space in the
vicinity, by drawing from it the sap
of the earth.

_Miscellaneous experiments concerning_
_Plants._

610. The Indian Fig sends down its branches within
one year so much curved, that it spontaneously
puts forth new roots, by which again,
being multiplied from one another,
one tree exhibits the appearance of a grove. The cause
is the abundance of sap, and the softness of the trunk,
which depresses the branches, if they are too much laden, and not strongly
supported. The leaves equal the width
of a small shield, the fruit the thickness
of a pea. The reason is, that continuous
shade helps in increasing the leaves,
while the fruit, which is of the sweetest taste, is defrauded (of nourishment).
And without doubt it is from the oily
humidity and the tenderness of the sap which renders the
branches in that plant so flexible.
611. Someone among the ancients asserts,
that among the Indians there is a tree, which for a few, but
immense—

a] Bee-Flovvers.

--- Page 401 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 357
immense leaves, three cubits in length and two cubits in width, and bears fruit of excellent taste growing from its bark. It could be that there exist plants which propel sap so vigorously that there is not enough time either to distribute it into various branches or to form a stem capable of bearing fruit. Among us, if a comparison is drawn, trees generally have small leaves. The fig tree bears the largest, then the vine, mulberry, sycamore. Of the last rank are the willow, lime, thorn. But you will find places where herbs, rather than trees, have the prerogative of large leaves, as in burdock, gourd, cucumber, cabbage. The cause coincides with that which we gave for the Indian fig: a rapid and copious expulsion of sap.

612. There are three things which popular use has made most highly commended for their sweetness: sugar, honey, and manna. The first was scarcely known to the ancients and rarely in use. It is found in reeds, but let it be inquired whether in a primary or a secondary way, or whether the bark of the reed also yields sugar. Bees make or collect honey. I remember hearing from a man whose industry in the study of agriculture excelled, that bees are occupied in preparing wax, and that at the beginning of the month of May he found beehives devoid of honey, and within

--- Page 402 ---
358          FRANCISCI BACONI
within fourteen days when sweet dews are scattered, packed like a cell. Some of the ancients write that in the valleys of Hyrcania, a tree named Occhuin distills honey in the morning. It may seem true that the sap and tears of certain trees are of a sweet taste. Also, sweet juices from certain fruits could be prepared by decoction for various uses, perhaps with the consistency of honey or sugar. But sun-dried raisins, figs, and currants would more readily promise this, though the method should still be investigated.
     613. A narrative is taken from the ancients that by the Persian sea, in a sandy stretch of coast, a tree is nourished by salt water, whose roots, when the sea recedes, are seen as if without bark, and corroded by saltiness, and like a crab with inserted claws, inhabit the sand, nor do they lack fruits. An experiment with a hard tree, such as a service-tree or a fir, implanted in sand, would be useful.
     614. There are also plants which serve man for clothing, such as the following: hemp, flax, cotton, nettles (from which clothes called "linen from nettles" are made), growing silk. Ropes are also made from the bark of reeds. The stem usually supplies fibrous material; sometimes down is accustomed to grow on it.                    615. He-

--- Page 403 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 359
615. Some regions report a rose-
colored plant, which contracts at the approach of night,
opens in the morning, and towards midday spreads its
adornment loosely; which the common people designate
by the title "the sleepy one". Therefore, there must be
many sleepy plants, since that is the nature of all flowers.
616. There are trees, though rare, with mossy
and downy roots. Others are surrounded by many
threads, as if bearded, such as the mandrake, suitable
for the deceptions of conjurers. For they construct a
formidable image from it, and with a face impressed
upon the top of the root, they make those fibers extend
like a beard down to the feet. The soil of Crete also
produces a certain kind of Nard (to be counted among
those called "phu"), whose shaggy root is like a pigeon
with hairy feet. Thus we have bulbous, fibrous, and
hairy roots. Concerning bulbous roots, I state this: the
sap tends more towards the air and the Sun. In fibrous
roots, it delights more in its subterranean seat; hairy
roots are of a nature intermediate between both, which,
by sending sap up and down, also adds a circular
propulsion of it.
617. The tears (sap) of certain trees
are combed off by the beards of goats, which, with their
beards, press their teeth and bite, especially in the
morning, before the dew has dried, pro-

--- Page 404 ---
360 FRANCIS BACON
emerging, tears adhere sparsely to the goats' beards. There is also a similar kind of ladanum.
618. A plane tree watered with wine, if ancient accounts are to be trusted, sheds its barrenness. Let the same be tried with roots; for in seed, the effect is scarcely noticeable.
619. The method of transplanting roots nourished in foreign soil across distant lands is this: that they be kept tightly in earthenware pots. If the capacity of the vessels is not equally large, the bottom should be permeable with holes made in it, so that the tree may feel what nourishes it, otherwise it will die, and, as it seems, be suffocated.
620. I took care to keep old cinnamon very dry at germination time, more than other plants, and everything by which others prospered, turned to its detriment. For its growth was more adverse in rainy weather. It also found a home among thickets of another kind, from which we usually see plants recoil, nor did it delight in direct sunlight. A cause embracing so many effects could equally be given: the nourishment, which that plant draws more sparingly. Let it be investigated how far Cassia, substituted for cinnamon, proves these things in itself.
621. An ancient writer relates that cassia, when collected

--- Page 405 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 361
collected, was placed under the skins of recently flayed animals, and as the skins rotted and produced worms, its marrow was eaten away by them, and by that means hollowed out; they abstain from the bark, inasmuch as bitterness makes it unpleasant.
622. Today's vines are of a lesser magnitude than that in which they were formerly seen, when cups and the image of Jove were fashioned from them. But they seem to have been wilder in their nature. For frequent pruning, repeated digging, and cultivation render these producers of wine fruitful by distributing the sap into the grapes, preventing the stems from growing too thick. The wood of vines resists rot for many years, remaining sound. And, what we may wonder at, although in no tree, while it is green, is there equal fragility of buds, yet the dried wood has such flexibility that it provided the service of a staff for Roman Centurions.
623. They report that vines elsewhere grow like herbs, sprawling on the ground, and their clusters become very large. An experiment would be beneficial to see whether plants accustomed to be supported by props would increase in leaves and fruits if they lie creeping on the ground, like hops, ivy, honeysuckle, etc.
624. Quinces or other apples, etc., to honey Q im-

--- Page 406 ---
362 FRANCIS BACON'S
immersed remain unharmed for a long time, but because perhaps
honey [*a*] imparts to them a cloying taste from its sweetness,
it would be better to use powdered sugar,
or wine syrup boiled down to an eighth.
An experiment of both stands in oranges,
lemons, pomegranates, since the application
of that sugar and syrup can be repeated several times.
625. Vessels perhaps also preserve fruits untouched
and free from harm, when filled
with fine sand, chalk powder, flour and pollen,
or oak wood dust and mill dust.
626. Whatever fruits you destine for longer
preservation, their ripeness should be anticipated
in picking, and they should be gathered
on a clear and dry day around noon, when the south wind
is not blowing, and the moon is silent and waning.
627. They say that grapes suspended in an empty, well-closed
vessel, placed not in a cellar, but in a dry place,
are preserved whole for a long time. Some
say this is done better in a vessel
that is filled with wine in such a way that the suspended grapes
do not touch it.
628. Whatever you spend on preserving
the stem, they say yields to the advantages of the cluster;
especially if the stem is inserted into elder
pith, but so that the elder does not
touch the fruit.
629. An-

[*a*] A Taste Overlushious.

--- Page 407 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 363**

**629.** It is an observation of the ancients that fruits, placed in jars submerged below well waters, last a long time.

**630.** Of herbs and plants, some, even raw and not having undergone the work of cooking, are used for meals, such as lettuces, endive, purslane, garden tarragon, nasturtium, cucumbers, muskmelons, radish, etc. Others only when cooked, such as celery, Roman sage, parsnip, turnip, asparagus, cultivated thistle (although even this, while it is tender and young, is not rejected from the table, and is edible even uncooked). The eating of others is not made suitable by any preparation, such as wormwood grass, wheat in the blade, centaury, hyssop, lavender, melissa, etc. The reason is, because these herbs, condemned for eating, lack two flavors containing all nutritive power, fatness and sweetness; or on the contrary, they consist of bitterness and a sharp taste, or of a juice so crude that it cannot be cooked to any maturity of nourishment. Those herbs or plants which may be eaten raw are strong in both qualities already mentioned (which is the nature of all edibles), such as onion, lettuce, etc. But in sweetness we require this (since the stomach admits what is sweet) that it not be too thick and heavy: for parsnip and garlic
$\quad$ Q 2 $\quad$ $\quad$ $\quad$ $\quad$ $\quad$ pin-

--- Page 408 ---
364 FRANCIS BACON'S
fatness, but it must be boiled down
so that its thickness may be removed. The substance also
must be tender, since we see that wheat,
barley, cultivated thistle, are not good
food, unless they have experienced fire, which
softens and makes them tender, and, as it were, by an artificial
maturity, makes them agreeable to the palate. Ra-
dish and garden tarragon, or similar things,
are used as seasoning, not for nourish-
ment. There are also herbs whose eating you would avoid,
yet they are destined to provide use for drinks; such as
hop, broom, etc. Let it be inquired what herbs,
besides those mentioned, are suitable for mixing drink;
for it would perhaps help to diminish the expenses of brew-
ing, if beer could be prepared consuming less
malt, or byne, and giving draughts of good and longer-lasting quality.
      631. The nutritive parts of plants are
seeds, roots, fruits; but seeds and roots are distinguished
by their pre-eminence in nourishment, since that
(nourishment) resides either none or very little
in leaves, and the same is true for flowers and
stems. The reason is, because roots,
seeds, fruits (for a mixture of oily and watery
substance constitutes all plants) contain more
oily substance, while leaves and flowers more watery. Furthermore,
they are more concocted, since the root, per-
petually subterranean, in that bosom of its nurse

--- Page 409 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 365
may be softened by the nourisher; and fruit and grains
(that is manifest) may ripen for a six-month period or
longer, or leaves may mature in a month.
      632. The seeds of most plants excel leaves or
roots in taste and smell. The reason is, because in
whatever plants a rough and sharp spirit does not quicken,
their virtue increases by concoction and maturity,
always conspicuous in the seed. But those which a
sharp spirit nourishes are more efficacious by themselves,
since that [spirit], enclosed in the roots, reigns;
and the air and the Sun, when experienced, cause it,
languishing, to dissipate. This is obvious in onions,
garlic, tarragon, etc. There are also plants with
very hot and aromatic roots, and insipid seeds,
like Ginger. The reason is as already stated, namely,
the heat of this plant is very dissipable, which,
confined underground, gains strength, but exhales,
vanishing, at the touch of air.
      633. The juices of fruits are either watery or
oily. To the former I reckon all from which a
drink is pressed, such as grapes, common apples
and pomegranates, cherries; there are also others
which, although they are not accustomed to yield a
drink, are nevertheless found to be of the same nature,
such as plums, service-berries, mulberries, raspberries,
oranges, citrons, etc. Juices of such thickness as in
                        Q 3                        drinks

--- Page 410 ---
366          FRANCIS BACON
though they may not be pressed for drink use, perhaps they will allow themselves to be diluted with mixed water:
  *And with mixed sorbs, they imitate vine-cups.*
The fruits of the white thorn and the scentless dog-rose would achieve the same. Of oily juice are olives, almonds, nuts of every kind, pine nuts, etc., also flammable. *Note*, that others from watery juices, swollen with acquired spirit, can be ignited, like wine. A third species of fruit has sweetness free from acridity and oiliness, such as figs, dates.

  634. It is a sound and pertinent observation that several trees, especially of the acorn-bearing kind, bear fruit only once every two years. The cause, without doubt, is the consumption of sap; whereas most garden trees, well-kept and cultivated, bear fruit continuously for many years.

  635. No tree is given, except the oak, which, besides its native fruits, nourishes so many spurious offspring of fruits. Next to the acorns it produces galls, sometimes apples and nuts, which can be ignited, and also bears berries firmly adhering to the tree without a stalk. It also produces mistletoe, but rarely. A sufficient cause for so many effects could be the compact body of the wood and the solidity of the oak's pith, which variously
                                        brings forth various juices.

--- Page 411 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century VII. 367
exerts. Therefore, for one considering superfetations in plants, a more abundant ascent of sap and a difficult exit must be attended to.
   636. There are two excrescences accustomed to grow on trees and to be considered fungi. One, called "boletus" by the Romans, found on the roots of oaks, and used as a delicacy for tables. The other, celebrated for the uses of physicians, is called "agaric" (mentioned by us before), growing on the tops of oaks, though some affirm that it is also found on the roots. I am easily led to the opinion which persuades that many excrescences are from a dead or decaying tree, its natural sap degenerating into a preternatural substance.
   637. Of trees, some for the most part, and that very well, enrich their lower branches with fruits, such as the oak, fig, walnut, pear, etc. Some (enrich) their upper (branches) better, such as the wild apple tree. Those which are more fruitful below have shade more as an aid than as a hindrance. In general, the best of the fruits are the lowest, inasmuch as they have vigorous and least exhausted sap, which travels the shortest path of nourishment. Hence, trees planted on embankments exhibit the largest lowest fruits, as said before [a]. Thus
        Q 4        &

a] Cent. 6.

--- Page 412 ---
368        FRANCIS BACON'S
and shade harms the lower branches, except in
those trees which delight in shade, or
at least are more fruitful; and of that
kind, which are either strong, like the oak, or
with broad leaves, like the walnut and fig, or
grow in a pyramidal shape, like the pear, but
if they are to be invigorated by a stronger sun, they best
produce at the top, like the wild apple
and garden apple, plum, etc.

      638. In some trees, old age itself finally
impregnated makes them fruitful, such as the almond,
pear, vine, and all nut-bearing trees.
The reason is that nut-bearing trees nourish
oily fruits; and in tender trees, the sap is
more watery, and less concocted. Refer
here to the almond as a congener;
as also the pear; which, though not oily, yet requires
much sap that is well concocted;
as is evident from the greater weight and
solidity of its fruits, than in apples, plums,
etc. The vine, as I find noted, when
young, excels in fruitfulness; when adult, it produces clusters
which, by expressing wine from them, will commend cups,
as the sap is more concocted. We also
see wine catch fire from its inherent oiliness. But the tender
age of most trees, including the apple and
plum, etc., blesses them with a more joyful yield.

                                        639. Plan-

--- Page 413 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century VII. 369
639. Plants from which, when cut, milk spurts out, are the fig, old lettuce, [a] sow-thistle, [b] spurge, etc. The reason is perhaps a rudiment of putrefaction, since that milk betrays acrimony, although it is thought to possess a lenitive faculty. For paper written with fig milk bears invisible letters, unless it is brought near fire; by which action you may see it turn black, so that a sharp and biting juice may thereby be proven. Lettuce of such age as to contain milk is infamous for poison. Spurge also is of a poisonous nature; and although sow-thistle feeds rabbits, sheep and other livestock nevertheless shun them. Add, that their milk, by opening warts and quickly consuming them, reveals a corrosive power. You will also find that wheat and any other kind of grain, if you remove it from the earth before the sprouts emerge, abounds in milk. The beginning of germination itself is nothing but a certain putrefaction of the seeds. In spurge (Euphorbia) there is milk, though not excessively white, yet of remarkable acrimony. The milk of celandine turns yellow not without sufficiently strong acrimony, and is a remedy for eyes suffering from cloudiness, and for purging catarrhs.
640. Fungi, both in the bodies of trees;
[a] Sowre-Thistles. [b] Spurge.

--- Page 414 ---
370 FRANCISCI BACONI
bodies, as in roots and earth; especially on oak. The reason is that the solidest trees provide the place of earth for such excrescences to push forth moss, fungi, and similar things.

641. There is scarcely any plant with red sap in its leaves and spike, except that which produces Dragon's Blood, whose primary mother is the Island of Socotra. Amaranth is entirely red, as is Brazilian wood, and also Sandalwood. That tree producing Dragon's Blood grows in the form of a [a] sugar-loaf. I would think it not beyond all semblance of truth that the sap of this plant is concocted within the body of the tree; since in grapes and pomegranates the sap is red, [while] the weeping sap is green. Hence the tree from which Dragon's Blood comes does not grow in height with such rapid increase, the sap not hastening so much towards the upper parts. Moreover, it is very astringent, which is why it moves slowly.

642. The poplar also, as we have from report, sometimes bears sweet moss, besides that which grows on apples; although it is clothed with a smooth and even bark, and is little mossy. The moss of the larch tree, when ignited, spreads a sweet odor and sparkles. Let the inquiry pass to the
                                                                 odo-

a] of a Sugar-loafe.

--- Page 415 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 371
of fragrant [trees/plants], such as mosses of cedar, cypress,
aloes wood, &c.
643. Hemlock, when drunk in a moderate draught, brings death with the least sense of pain; a mild punishment used by the Athenians for those worthy of capital punishment. Nearly twin to this is the bite of an asp, applied to the body by Cleopatra. The reason is that the struggle of the spirits makes the torments of death especially to be feared; here, as if by an infused mist of sleep, the spirits gradually fall asleep with the vapors, as usually happens in the death of a decrepit old man. I would nevertheless think it afflicts less than opium, which has hot parts mixed in.
644. Some fruits sweeten before maturity, like myrobalans. So fennel seeds, not yet ripe, are sweet, afterwards aromatic. For some, maturity never brings sweetness, such as tamarinds, hawthorn fruits, wild apples, acacias. The reason is that the former are strong in an abundant and subtle spirit, which is precocious, the parent of sweetness. The latter obtain a cold and acidic juice, which the heat of the Sun cannot cook through so that it may sweeten. The myrobalan, however, consists of parts of nature opposing each other; for it is sweet and astringent.
Q 6 645. Few

--- Page 416 ---
372          FRANCIS BACON
     645. Few herbs are imbued with a salty taste. On the contrary, the blood of all living creatures is salty. The reason may be that salt, though a rudiment of life, cannot maintain the place of a primary taste in plants, as they exhibit bitter, sour, sweet, and pungent tastes, rarely salty. But those [a] strong tastes sometimes present themselves simultaneously in the humors of living creatures, not so frequently in flesh or in substances of a more oily nature, which do not easily allow such tastes to be mixed with them. And the saltiness of the blood itself is slight and as if hidden. Some plants attest to saltiness: sea algae, [b] samphire, or [c] sea fennel, scurvy-grass. They say that in a certain sea among the Indians, a floating herb is found, called Salgazus, which spreads itself through the waves, so as to present the appearance of a meadow to observers. It is certain that salt is extracted from the ashes of plants for medicinal uses.
     646. There is an account by an ancient writer that an herb called Lincostin grows in water, which abounds in thorns, and shows another growing from its leaves. The origin is attributed to a humor, which, collected within the thorns and by the
                                        motion

  a] High Tastes.
  b] Samphire.
  c] Scurvy-Grass.

--- Page 417 ---
      SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII.    373
...moved by the sun's heat, decaying, it germinates.
But I remember having seen with admiration a rose born from a rose, similar to a prolific honeysuckle [a].
  647. Barley (as appears in its preparation for making beer), soaked for three days in water, and that water having been strained, spread on a dry board, will sprout to the length of half an inch; and the more it rests and the less it is ventilated, so much greater will be its growth, until [b] it has been exhausted. The same appears in wheat. For the seeds are nourished from the remaining quantity of the previous water, no fresh (water) having been added; the plants are nourished by water. Let the inquiry proceed further, since it is clear from what has been said before that the first germination of plants does not need assistance. The rosebuds teach this, which bloom when water is poured on them. Therefore, I would advise trying whether such germinations of grains cannot be further advanced, for example, into a herb or a flower, by the benefit of water alone, or with a small amount of earth added. For if fortune grants success, equal to those experiments with bryony and roses, a more fortunate outcome of those (experiments) in water than in earth will be.

  a] Honey-Suckles , that they call Top and Top-gallants.
  b] the heart be out.

--- Page 418 ---
**374 OF FRANCIS BACON**
...how much more convenient will be the absorption of nourishment from water. This will shed light on the matter, that drink infused into meat, as we have seen in a capon, etc., nourishes better and more easily than food separately combined with drink. Apply the same test to roots, as well as grains. For example, macerate a turnip for some time, and then observe if it grows when dried.

648. Malt (commonly called maltha) when macerated swells so much that, after it has pushed out sprouts, and has been dried over a furnace, it will have grown by at least one modius from eight [modii of original volume], even after removing what has sprouted; and a modius of powder will be added on top of the malt. I suppose this occurs not only from a looser and more open arrangement of the parts, but also from an increase in substance from the water applied to the maceration.

649. Byne acquires a taste more pleasing to the palate; a clearer example of which is in unboiled wort. Sweetening certainly deserves accurate observations of diligent investigation, since it is a step towards nourishment; and to make things that are not nutritive, to be such, turning it into a more dignified natural process, would be an experiment of immense profit, so that the new supply may not always be exhausted by substitution.

--- Page 419 ---
650. The pod or husk of most seeds is hidden around the root; the onion brings it forth with itself into the light, so that it appears not unlike a hood on the top of a tender onion. The reason perhaps is that the skin or pod is not easily broken, as the peeling of onions shows how tenacious in substance that skin is.

651. The curled leaves of plants indicate an abundance of moisture, which, bursting forth so continuously, proceeds in such a way that it cannot be reduced to an even distribution, but it is necessary that it remain more neglected elsewhere. The weakest form of curling is hairiness, as in Roman sage and burdock. The next is that in the extremities, as in lettuce, tender cabbage. The third is, in mature cabbage, sessile lettuce.

652. There is a tradition concerning the fir and pine, especially when decayed by age, even if, like some decayed woods, they do not shine

--- Page 420 ---
376          FRANCIS BACON'S
it can, because trees, rejoicing in the sun more
liberally admitted, with difficulty press the earth with deeply descending
roots, which for the most part their height makes
remarkable. For the desire of enjoying the Sun,
causes them not to grow thick in bulk.
The same reason operates beneath the earth, so that
they tend downwards so much less, the more
they recoil from the receding Sun. Certain [plants]
driven into the earth by too deep planting,
because they eagerly desire to be most amply
bathed in solar rays, have abandoned their former root,
a new one having been put forth nearer the earth's surface,
experience has taught. It is entirely certain,
that the olive abounds in oily sap, that the ash
is an excellent service for building a fire;
the cypress also is warm.
The oak, a tree of the former kind, delights in the earth;
and therefore grows up from the earth. The pine
and fir possess so much native heat,
that they need less of the sun's adventitious [heat].
Certain herbs also the same nature distinguishes,
such as that called 'Devil's bite',
it stands on roots driven so deeply, that it
refuses to be pulled up unharmed. whence both the name and the fable's
origin. For they say the root was so wholesome
that the Devil impressed the bite of an envious tooth.
Antiquity transmits to us a remarkable fir, whose entire
soil had to be changed in another region of the place.

--- Page 421 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII.      377
soil, had possessed the earth with roots pressed down to eight cubits, so that they could not be removed without harm.
   654. Observation showed that a branch of a certain tree, stripped of bark for some space from below and inserted into the earth, had grown. Certainly, a branch of that kind of trees would not have sprouted unless stripped of bark and planted. On the contrary, we see a tree die with its body stripped of bark above the ground. The reason perhaps is that the clothed part attracts nourishment better, while the bark merely transmits it continuously.
   655. Lively and moist bunches of grapes will last the entire winter, with the clusters suspended together in an arched place that is warm; especially if you allow a small piece of the stem, broken off with the cluster, to remain attached when you pick them.
   656. Reed or cane is an aquatic plant, accustomed to growing only in water; it has the properties that it is hollow, that it divides its stem and root with nodes; when dried, it surpasses any wood in hardness and fragility; it produces no branches, with many stems sprouting from a single root. They are of different sizes; the smallest are used for covering houses, or for stopping up cracks in ships; and that better
                                          with glue

--- Page 422 ---
378 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OF FRANCIS BACON
and pitch. Those which are secondary in
thickness, provide fishermen with the use
of a pole and a rod. In China, the thighs
of evildoers are beaten with them. Species
notable for their differences are common
reed, cassia fistula, sugar cane. Of all
plants, it is both bent most easily and,
when bent, springs back. Among those
which are nourished by earth mixed with
water, it seems to be fed by a great deal
of moisture; whence both its bark is very
smooth and its body is very hollow.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;657. The sap contained in trees is of
various natures, if it is emitted. That of
the vine, beech, and pear is more watery
and clearer. That of the apple is thicker;
that of the cherry is gummier; that of the
elm is frothy; that of the fig is milky. The
sap of the mulberry usually adheres in the
vicinity of the bark, which, when struck
lightly with a stone, reveals it, but when
an instrument is driven in deeper, it is
found to be dry. Trees whose fruits are
most humid generally have such a
constitution. Vines and pears are very
moist, apples are more spongy, the milk
of the fig resembles the quality of rennet.
In certain acid herbs there is a similar
milk, such as serves for forming cheeses
in springtime.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;658. In some trees the wood is purer,
in others more knotty. A praised
experiment concerning it is circulated, if
the speech of a speaker is caught from one
end, with the other applied

--- Page 423 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 379
at the extreme edge. For knotty [woods] offer a difficult passage to sound. Some have veins wandering sparsely and twisted in a wavy manner, like oak, a splendid material for paneling work; Maple, from which squares are made. Other wood is smoother and more even, like fir and walnut. Some [wood] worms and spiders infest more, another suffers less from that inconvenience; something of this kind is told about Irish trees. Use makes no small distinction between trees; thus oak, cedar, chestnut are suitable for buildings. Others are more suitable for plowing implements, like ash; others for bridge piles: which alternate between wet and dry conditions, like elm; some for planks, like firs; some for tables, sideboards, and desks, like walnut. Oaks born in moist soil are rightly designated for building ships, whence the tenacity of the wood, so that it does not crack or split from the explosion of war engines. Here English and Irish wood is thought to excel. Fir and pine are given for preparing masts because of their height, straightness, and lightness. Some for stakes, like oak, others for fuel, like ash. And so for the rest.
      659. The production of trees and plants in these regions, least of all in others, sometimes owes much to fortune. Most

--- Page 424 ---
380          FRANCIS BACON
For very many have, not without happy success, changed their native soil, as Damask roses, unknown to the English a century ago, are now in very common use. But the fact that plants become more happily accustomed to soil as if it were kindred, and embrace another less, indicates an inherent spirit and a stimulus of hidden nature. Thus fir and pine thrive on mountains; poplar, willow, alder, in rivers and wet places; ash in coppice woods, but if it stands solitary outside them, it is better. Juniper loves chalk, as do most fruit-bearing trees; reeds and osiers love the vicinity of water. Sea fennel delights in the companionship of rocks; vineyards (delight in) the slopes of hills, facing the south-east wind.
     660. There are also cases where the inherent nature of the soil is gathered from the herbs that grow there, as wild thyme indicates soil suitable for pasturing cattle; betony and strawberries (indicate soil) suitable for wood; chamomile, for wheat. Mustard seed growing up after plowing indicates remarkable vigor of the soil, also for growing wheat. From self-heal, a judgment is made about the fertility of pastures, and so on.
     661. More than one region has produced plants from the very bodies of trees and plants, besides mistletoe on oaks. Among the Syrians, Cassyta, an herb, is the offspring of tall trees,

--- Page 425 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 381
...offspring, which wraps itself around the parent trunk; and sometimes, when entangled, embraces thorns. A certain species of polypody grows on trees, although it does not spread diffused through the generative trunk. The herb called 'faunos' grows on the wild olive; and hippophaeston on the purging chamaedrys, an amulet for epilepsy.

662. An observation from antiquity by some, that the winds which the East sends forth, although they are cold and blow not without harm to fruits, yet the South winds sometimes reign with a damaging blast, especially while the tree is in bloom, and the sky is rainy; so that they altogether stir up excessively humid conditions. Zephyrus (the West wind) is considered most benign, and diligent investigation has also shown that green winters, not bound by frost, harm trees; so much so that if such a winter recurs two or three times, it kills almond and other trees. The cause coincides with the preceding one, because, namely, the vigor of the earth, too much consumed, fails; some of the ancients, namely, commending warm winters.

663. If snow, spread out, covers the earth for a long time, it is considered an indicator of fertility in that year; because it does not allow the vigor of the sun to dissipate, and it has better moistening properties than rain, since the earth sucks up the snow as if from a breast, and hu-

--- Page 426 ---
382          FRANCIS BACON'S
and its moisture is very thin, being, as it were, the foam
of waters contained in the clouds.
    664. If rains precede maturity a little, they fall happily
for succulent and moist fruits, such as vines, olives,
pomegranates; but they contribute more to abundance
than to the dignity of the fruits; since dry harvests yield
the best wines. Moderate rains, however, are also profitable
for grain, lest the sun's heat scorch it too much. In
general, nocturnal rains are preferred over diurnal ones,
because the scorching heat of the sun does not follow
them so closely. It is also clear from irrigation used
during summer that evening irrigation is the best.
    665. The differing nature of the soil certainly deserves
diligent experimental work. Thus, the earth which softens
very easily after absorbing rains is usually commended,
yet is very hard and dry before receiving the rains.
That which, when ploughed, produces larger clods,
is inferior in quality, and yields to that which makes
smaller ones. That which luxuriates in moss, so that it
can be called mouldy, is not good. That which, when
dug or ploughed, emits a sweet odor, is praised in the
name of its sap, which it fosters, prepared for vegetables.
Some state that the extremities of the low and earth-
near Iris (rainbow) lean more on this land than on that.
                                     To happen

--- Page 427 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 383
That this can happen not uniformly, inasmuch as the earth is more dewy; a very good sign of more approved soil. A scarcity of plants clearly reveals the leanness of barren land, especially with their color tending towards dark. Withered and rusty plants at their tops indicate coldness of the soil, which also occurs in mossy trees. Land whose grass the Sun quickly scorches and burns up usually testifies to the need for the art of improvement, being sterile by itself. Rich, mature, and mild, is best, existing more [a] mouldy on the border of loamy and sandy, especially not muddy and sticky. Land which after rains scarcely allows itself to be subdued by the plough is usually fertile, as it is tenacious and full of nutrients.
666. We wonder that the ancients recorded that trees, especially vines, fertilized with added dust, grow more successfully; so that they intentionally sprinkled dust on them. That sprinkling of dust after rains could seem a kind of cultivation, or in place of manuring, as if earth mixed with water were lightly applied. They note that regions with dusty fields and roads nourish vines most successfully.
667. The ancients proclaim as a remarkable aid for trees, of lupines
Cau-

a] Being meere VVould.

--- Page 428 ---
**FRANCIS BACON'S**
Lupine stems, and leaves applied to the roots, or worked in by plowing, wherever the area is designated for bearing grain. To this purpose also contribute burnt vine shoots sprinkled on the earth; and the practice of fertilizing the earth when the west wind blows and the moon is waning earned the approval of antiquity, as if it would be greatly beneficial, since the earth is then drier and open to receiving manure.

668. The grafting of vine onto vine (such as my imagination suggests to me) has today become obsolete, though used by the ancients, and indeed in three ways. The first was that which was commonly known. The second was the boring of the middle trunk, which would receive adopted shoots. The third was, of two vines growing with, as it were, conjoined growths, the cutting back to the pith, and their tight binding together.

669. Diseases and the harmful malignancy to grain deserve investigation: and they would be investigated all the more carefully, if it were within human power to oppose discovered evils with a devised remedy. Now many things, unconquered by remedies, do not yield. Honeydew or mildew is among those which most infest, arising undoubtedly from a tighter compression of the air, so that it rarely spreads itself over hills and widely open lands; such as with us the Yorkshire Countryside, this evil

--- Page 429 ---
      SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII.    385
This evil cannot be removed, unless it is confined to narrow spaces, and the land is extended into wider fields. Nor am I unaware that this has benefited certain farms.
Another disease is the production of sterile darnel and wild oats, into which grain (barley especially) often degenerates, and it arises from the weakness of the sown grain, which if it has been either too old or moldy, is accustomed to produce darnel. Another (cause is) the satiety of the earth, which by continuing the yield of the same grain (I do not mean growing there, but grains of the same species, for example, barley, wheat, etc.) falls short of its former fertility; so that it is fitting not only for the soil to rest, but also for the seed to be changed. Also there is a harmful blast of winds, which harm at two times, either while they shake off the flowers, or (when) the grain is in full maturity. Another plague of the farm is great heat when wheat pushes out ears, rare among us, frequent in hotter regions; so that the calamity (calamitas) may have originated from the stalk (calamus), when the grain could not emerge from the stem. Equally harmful is excessive moisture at the time of sowing, infamous among our countrymen for great scarcity of grain, so that the grain does not grow at all; whence they are often forced to sow summer grain in the place where winter grain had been sown. Similar misfortune from continuous severe frost without snow,
               R               frost,

--- Page 430 ---
386      OF FRANCIS BACON
frost, especially when the air has begun to become wintry shortly after the seed has been committed to the earth. Another damage comes from worms, which are sometimes generated in the root, and prevail immediately after sowing, and after the sharp heats of the sun which follow rains [a]. The ear produces another worm, especially when heat often bursts forth from the clouds. There are also harmful weeds, either suffocating or overshadowing the grain, which, when suppressed, they either kill or deprive of nourishment. Excessive luxuriance of the grain is also a disease, which is removed by mowing it down, or by letting in sheep to graze. It is likewise bad to sow grain around the time of heavy rains, or in the very season of autumn. Oil or other fat also causes harm, if the seed is imbued with them, those substances namely having an antipathy to the nourishment derived from water.
   670. Observation has produced a remedy for a blighted and damaged crop. Grains are steeped for a short time in wine before sowing; and it is recommended as a prophylactic. It is also thought to be beneficial for the sown grain to be mixed with ashes, and if the seed is committed to the furrows during a waning moon, they believe it will be rendered healthy and vigorous.
a] See Exper. 664.

--- Page 431 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 387
They also believe. Whether grain mixed with other things proves itself by its yield, the reliability of experiment has not yet made certain; however, it is conjectured that it will be beneficial, and if a few beans are sown with wheat, the wheat will be of so much better quality. They note from observation that when other crops are sown with grain, the latter benefits from the increase. And although grains imbued with oil or fat suffer damage, nevertheless, when soaked in putrefying oil dregs (which they call amurca), they are thought to be less harmed by worms. They say that if grain is reaped, the grains will indeed be longer, but more empty, and will have more husk.
      671. I find among the observations that one-year-old seed is the best, two-year-old worse; that which is older than that is entirely infertile; although it is certain that some seeds and grains are surpassed by others in durability. Winnowing, when completed, shows the grain of the best quality at the bottom, and that which, when broken and crushed by teeth, turns yellowish, is preferred to that which is too white.
      672. Experience has shown that, among other plants, the roots of sorrel go deepest into the earth, so that they have sometimes been found to have penetrated the soil to three cubits; and they alone surpass the others in this, that they do not resist repeated replanting. It is a cold and acidic herb,
                        R 2                      which

--- Page 432 ---
388          OF FRANCIS BACON
which seems to delight in the earth, fleeing the sun.
     673. It has been observed that certain
herbs grow more luxuriantly when irrigated with salt water, such as
radish, beet, rue, pennyroyal. The limitations
of this experiment could be relaxed,
by extending it to other and more effective herbs, such as
tarragon, mustard seed, rocket, and similar ones.
     674. It is a strange opinion, commonly accepted and
prevalent, that fragrant and wholesome herbs
are sought after by certain venomous beasts;
namely, that snakes delight in fennel;
that the toad often hides under sage, and they are rarely
found in cinquefoil. It could be
that they seek refuge there for the sake of shade or something else
rather than for the virtue of the herb.
     675. They promise a shortcut to immense
wealth (unless the conjectural nature, too deeply ingrained,
excludes all belief, in my opinion) if anyone, at the
beginning of the year, could discern and gather from prognostics
whether there would be an abundance or scarcity of grain,
grass, or any fruit; if, with signs
indicating hope of fertility, a pre-purchase could be made
of the entire produce to be born from the land;
as the ancients relate of Thales,
when he wished to show with what means of enrichment
a philosopher was equipped, and had
foreseen a most fruitful olive harvest,
he transferred the hope of the harvest to himself by means of a monopoly;
                                                            penu-

--- Page 433 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 389
but if the signs indicate scarcity, he might consult his own profit from the remaining supply of the previous year. Snows continued longer are said to offer an omen of a more fertile year for grain, just as an early or late winter brings sterility with it. An open sky and a serene winter are unfavorable to crops. Some of these things are mentioned in the preceding sections. But other prognostics of the same nature must be examined with diligent inquiry.
      676. Native distinctions of properties seem to occur in some plants, by which they differ from each other and from all others. Whatever is oily in the olive occupies the extremities, while other fruits present their property collected in a nut or kernel. The fir tree certainly lacks any small pit, nut, or kernel; unless you give this name to its tiny grains. The Punic apple or pomegranate and the apples of the pine tree alone distinguish their grains by various, as it were, cells. No herb's leaves curl except for cabbage or sessile lettuce. No plant doubles its leaf, to be divided equally with the stalk and fruit or seed, except for the cultivated thistle. No flower comes forth so dispersed as the honeysuckle. A wide field opens up for this contemplation, which shows in that structure which nature labors to produce, while certain spe-
                                     R 3                cies

--- Page 434 ---
390        OF FRANCIS BACON
produces certain species, that an accidental
composition of matter is often given, and
variously mutable; elsewhere rarely, nor
in any way to be varied; just as it happens
in animals. Thus dogs have a resemblance
to the wolf and fox, horses with donkeys,
cows and oxen with buffaloes, the hare
with rabbits, etc. Thus among birds the
kite and sparrowhawk do not differ much
in form from the hawk, the common dove
from the ring-dove and turtle-dove; the
blackbird from the greater and lesser thrush;
the crow from the raven, jackdaw, and
chough, etc. Among animals, the Elephant
and the pig, the bird of Paradise and the
peacock among birds, and a few others
scarcely have a species to which they are
more closely related.
      We depart from the description of
plants, and delegate the explanation of their
virtues to herbals and books of natural
history, on which men have diligently
toiled even to the anxiety of curiosity. But
we so watch over the institution of
experiments, that they do not dwell in low
matters, but ascend to the investigation of
causes, and shine forth in eliciting axioms.
Nor am I unaware that this course is well-
worn by ancient and modern writers, but
in such a way that in rendering causes and
constructing rules they have produced the
playthings of imagination; and thus the
old and that theory which now comes into
use

--- Page 435 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 391
the theory savors of mere contaminations of sounder experience, nor does it digest it.

*A solitary experiment concerning the healing of wounds.*

677. I find it recorded by ancient writers that skins, especially of rams, freshly removed and applied to wounds, prevent them from swelling up and becoming ulcerated, and, once consolidated, heal them again. Egg white has the same power. The cause is a moderate agglutination, since each body is tenacious and viscous, and with the defluxion of humors repelled from the wounds, it does not compress too much.

*A solitary experiment concerning the fat which is diffused through the flesh.*

678. All flesh can generally be turned into a fatty substance, if it is cut into small pieces, and the parts are placed in a glass closed with a membrane, which is placed in boiling water for six or seven hours. This experiment may be profitable for preparing fat or grease for various uses. But it is necessary that the flesh be unsuitable for human consumption, such as horse, dog, bear, fox, beaver, etc.

R 4                                  Expe-

--- Page 436 ---
392          FRANCIS BACON'S
A solitary experiment concerning the ac-
     celerated maturation of drink.
  679. There is a story derived from antiquity,
that must, placed in properly closed vessels
and lowered into the sea, very quickly matures for
use as a drink. The same should be tried
with uncooked beer liquor.
  A solitary experiment concerning
          hairiness and feathers.
  680. Beasts are hairy compared to men,
and rustic men compared to urban ones; and
the feathers of birds surpass in density the hairs of
beasts. The reason why man has smooth skin
is not abundant heat and humor, although
indeed, the abundant growth of hair has its
origin thence; but not so much are those two
required, as excretory heat and humor,
(for whatever is assimilated is not turned into
hair) which prevails in beasts, and in rustic
men. Nearly the same reason applies to the feathers
of birds, since they assimilate less, and excrete
more than beasts. For their excretions are mostly
liquid, and their flesh is generally dry.
Add that they do not have proper urinary organs,
so that all excretory humor goes into feathers.
Hence I do not wonder that birds are
commended for tables above beasts, because
                                                               flesh

--- Page 437 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 393
their flesh assimilates less, and excretes more finely. Furthermore, the head of a human is hairy from birth, but not other parts of the body. The cause perhaps might be a lack of perspiration, since much of the material for hair exhales through insensible perspiration in other parts of the body. Next, the skull, consisting of a more solid substance, is less nourished and assimilates less, and excretes more. The chin is similar. It is also evident that hairs do not grow on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet, which are parts of the body that are more permeable. Since the skin of children is also such, they are less conspicuously hairy.

Solitary Experiment concerning the swiftness of motion in birds.

681. The swiftness of birds in motion exceeds that of beasts, whose flight for the most part no beast's running equals. The cause is the greater abundance of spirits in birds in proportion to the smallness of their body, than in beasts. The reason brought forward by some, that that motion partakes of carriage, while beasts walk, is invalid, since thus swimming ought to be swifter than running. And that carriage does have the subsidiary aid of wings to be accomplished.
R 5                                     Expe-

--- Page 438 ---
394        OF FRANCIS BACON

*A solitary experiment concerning the di-*
        *verse clarity of the sea.*
    682. The breath of the North makes the sea
more transparent than that of the South. The reason is that
the surface of salt water is little oily,
as the hottest days prove. Then,
because the South wind slightly relaxes the water; so that
boiling water is not as clear as
cold water.

    *A solitary experiment concerning*
        *the difference of heat in fire &*
                *boiling water.*
    683. Fire ignites wood, first making
it luminous, then black &
fragile, finally breaking it, & reducing it
to ashes. Expect nothing of the sort from boiling
water. The reason is that fire attenuates the spirit of the
body, then emits it. Attenuation
however generates light; emission first causes fragility,
then dissolution into ashes, nor does any other body besides enter.
In water, the spirit of the body is not so attenuated;
a portion of water also enters, which will increase
the spirits, & to some extent extinguish the
fire; as we see happen from hot water. Like-
wise in bodies which, with the entry of water
prohibited, admit insinuating heat,
                                        heat,

--- Page 439 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 395
heat, hot water dissolves the parts of fire.
Thus, between boiled and roasted eggs (which water
absolutely does not penetrate), there is scarcely a visible
difference; but it is quite noticeable in fruits
and meat, which are permeable to some water entering.

   *A solitary experiment concerning the*
   *tempering of heat by moisture.*

   684. The bottom of a vessel full of hot water
(as experience testifies) heats to such an extent
that it allows one to move their hand to it and remove
it. The reason is, because the moisture of water, just as
it extinguishes coals where entry is open, so it
tempers heat, whatever part it has touched.
Wherefore it is to be noted, that moisture,
although it does not transmit through bodies without
communication of substance (as heat and cold
usually do), gives proof of its operation, not by
entering the body, but by tempering heat
and cold, as this instance teaches. We
also see distillations in water (which
they call a bath) not differing much from
distillations in fire; just as tin plates filled with water
do not easily melt; without water, they melt completely.
Moreover, butter and oil, which are by themselves
very easily flammable, perform the same thing, to be
attributed to the virtue of humidity.
                R 6                     Expe-

--- Page 440 ---
398 FRANCISCI BACONI

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*yawning.*

685. It did not escape the diligence of the
ancients, namely, the danger of pricking the ears of one yawning. The reason is, because yawning stretches the inner membrane of the ear, with the spirit and soul drawn in. For this, like sighing, first strongly draws in the spirit, then expels it.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*hiccup.*

686. It is from the same workshop of antiquity
that sneezing drives away hiccup. The reason is, because the movement of hiccup is an elevation of the stomach, which sneezing somewhat depresses, and diverts the movement elsewhere. For first, we see hiccup arise from too much food ingested (especially in children), whence an extension of the stomach. Also acidic food and drink causes the same by irritating the stomach, and this movement ceases either by diverting or by holding the breath. The former happens in sneezing, the latter is clear from the fact that held breath partly removes hiccup. You will feel the same with the mind turned to serious matters, as is commonly done; and with vinegar applied to the nostrils or gargled, because it constricts and inhibits the movement of the spirits.

Expe-

--- Page 441 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 397**

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*sneezing.*

697. Looking at the Sun causes sneezing. The cause is not the heating of the nostrils (for otherwise, if the nostrils were merely open to the Sun, it would only excite it for a moment), but the depression of the humors of the brain, which suffuse the eyes, whence by a sympathetic movement they are drawn to the nostrils and create sneezing. Thus, conversely, internal tickling of the nostrils draws humors to the nostrils, but by sympathy to the eyes, which are moistened. But yet, observation dictates that one accustomed to sneeze frequently can overcome sneezing if he rubs his eyes until they are suffused by a flow of watery humor. The reason is the diversion of the humor, which was about to descend to the nostrils, to the eyes.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*the weakness of teeth.*

688. Teeth are more affected by cold drink or similar things than other parts. The reason is twofold: because bone resists cold more than flesh, which yields to it; whence from the resistance of the bone, the cold is intensified. Secondly, because these parts are bloodless, since blood tempers cold; therefore a strong impression on the nerves—

--- Page 442 ---
398          FRANCIS BACON
...cold makes an impression, as these parts are
bloodless. Thus sharp cold renders bones fragile;
and we observe that contusions of bones are difficult
to heal in harsher weather.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
               *the Tongue.*

   689. It is recorded that signs of diseases are more
easily imprinted on the tongue than on other parts;
even of internal heat, of which a blackening tongue
is a prime example. Cattle also of various colors
bear tongues interspersed with scattered spots, etc.
The reason, beyond doubt, is the tenderness of that
part, which more easily displays all alterations than
any fleshy part.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
               *Taste.*

   690. A mouth with no taste indicates a salty flavor,
especially bitter, often also nauseating, never sweet.
The reason is, corrupted humor in the tongue, which
not rarely produces saltiness, bitterness, and nausea,
never sweetness. For the others are steps towards
corruption.

                                             Expe-

--- Page 443 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 399**

A Solitary Experiment concerning
certain prognostics of pestilential
weather.

691. When in the past year the slaughter
of a cruel plague was raging, many toads
were seen near London in various ditches and
lower grounds, tailed to a minimum length
of three or four inches, whereas they usually
are tailless. Those who
directed their observation to this seemed
to themselves to have found the earth
and air wonderfully disposed to putrefaction.
They add also that roots (such as parsnips,
darnel) are more disgustingly sweet, throughout
the contagious season of the year.

A Solitary Experiment concerning special
simples in Medicine.

692. It is the part of medical prudence
to diligently examine to which simples nature
has given extremely subtle parts, devoid
of biting or acrimony. For they soften hard things,
open obstructions, and expel harmful things,
with a gentle offens

--- Page 444 ---
400      OF FRANCIS BACON
for strengthening the head; fumitory for the spleen, and many other things
not few in number. In general, various small animals
generated from putrefaction, though disgusting to the taste,
are considered of this nature, such as earthworms,
millipedes, slugs, etc. Also, the so highly
praised troches of vipers, and serpents' flesh somewhat
seasoned and prepared (held in some esteem among the ancients)
are, in my opinion, of a similar nature. Parts
also of putrefied animals (such as castoreum
and musk, which have very subtle parts) are to be
referred here. The putrefactions also of plants (such as agaric,
the fungi growing on elder) are manifestly of excellent
virtue. The reason is, because putrefaction is a
motion in the parts of bodies most subtle above others;
and since the life of living beings does not admit of its use
(which, according to the opinion of some followers of Paracelsus,
if it were permissible to apply and ingest it into the body,
would bestow immortality upon us) we take what is closest
in subtlety of operation, namely putrefied bodies, which can be safely
used.

      Various Experiments concerning
                  Venus.

   693. From the knowledge of the ancients, frequent
Venus (sexual activity) dulls the sharpness of sight, although however
                                          Eunu-

--- Page 445 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 401
Eunuchs, unfit for procreation, suffer from weakness of the eyes. In the former (those who engage in frequent Venus), the cause is the consumption of spirits; in the latter (eunuchs), the brain is more humid. For the excessive humidity of the brain causes the visual rays to thicken and obstructs their passages, as is shown by the weakness of sight that comes with age, having as a secondary cause, namely, diminished spirits. You may also truly attribute blindness to catarrhs and defluxions. All eunuchs have signs by which they are proven to be more humid, such as swelling of the thighs, loose bowels, smoothness of the skin, etc.

694. The pleasure perceived from the venereal act is by far superior to that affecting the other senses. Comparison with itching fails in expressing its proper nature, although that (itching) may be pleasant to the touch. But the causes are hidden. First, the movements of the spirits are qualified by all the organs of the senses, which generate as many movements – and consequently pleasures or displeasures – as the species of the organs themselves are distinguished. The instruments of sight, hearing, taste, and smell consist of a varied structure, as do the genital parts. Scaliger therefore not ineptly recognizes the pleasure from coitus as a sixth sense. And if other organs were available, and what-

--- Page 446 ---
Here is the translation of the Latin text, preserving formatting and paragraph breaks, and maintaining continuity with the previous page:

qua illa cæteris major vi-
deatur ; tamen non iter late patet, in pau-
cis tantum conspicua, in odorum nempe
fragrantia , vino , aliisque gratis vapori-
bus . Odorum magna & in expedito est
virtus , refocillando homines animi deli-
quium passos. Quoad potum, certum vi-
detur ex ebrietate voluptatem illi ex Ve-
nere proximam esse. Magna gaudia vali-
do in spiritus motu ingruunt eosque affi-
ciunt , similisque pene oblectatio regnat
in Venere.
695. Non coarguendæ observationis
eſt

---

by which it might seem greater than the others;
however, the path does not lie wide open, in few
things only conspicuous, namely in the fragrance of odors,
wine, and other pleasant vapors. Of odors, there is great and readily available
virtue, in reviving men who have suffered a faint
or swoon. As for drink, it seems certain
that from intoxication, the pleasure next to that from Venus
is. Great joys arise from a strong movement of spirits
and affect them, and almost similar delight reigns
in Venus.
695. Not to be refuted is the observation
is

--- Page 447 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 403
It is said that males, when the sky is wintry, burn more for marital embraces, while females rush into Venus in summer. The reason is that in a warmer and drier body, such as that of a male, Summer dissipates spirits more by exhaling them, while Winter cold condenses them more and preserves them intact. In cold and humid bodies (such as those of females), heat nourishes and provokes the spirits, while winter dulls them. Furthermore, abstinence or a longer intermission of venereal acts in humid and well-constituted bodies generates various diseases, especially dangerous inflammations. The reason is evident, because the principal evacuation of spirits ceases; for another (evacuation) is scarcely given except in Venus and bodily exercise; so that the omission of either generates diseases from repletion.

Various experiments concerning insects.

Let human industry labor worthily and profitably in examining the nature of vivification; whose ingenious workings small things usually reveal better than large ones, imperfect things than perfect ones, parts than the whole. Thus, they propose that vivification generated from putrefaction should be known more exactly, by contemplation that will be most profitable; first in explaining the vivification of

--- Page 448 ---
**FRANCIS BACON**
origin; secondly, by configuration; thirdly, by bringing to light many things which perfectly regard the nature of generated things, and have receded further into obscurity from popular knowledge; fourthly, by transferring some speculative observations on insects to the operation and effects to be produced in perfect animals. *Note*, the word 'insect' does not satisfy the subject matter and purpose, yet we always use it for brevity's sake when we wish to signify animals generated from putrefaction.

696. The material of insects is varied. Some are born from mud or dung, such as worms, eels, snakes, etc. For both kinds are from putrefaction, as they lack any means of preservation when water and the Moon are waxing. As for dung, all excrements are ejected matter of putrefying nourishment. Others [are born] in wood, either growing or cut. Let it be inquired which woods produce these offspring more, and what season of the year. We see polypod worms, accustomed to rolling themselves into balls, generated especially under logs, not in the wood itself. They are also said to be found in gardens, where there are no logs at all. But their generation requires some receptacle, against the sun, rain, dew, such as is provided in wood: therefore, being free from venom, and among

--- Page 449 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 405
are said by doctors to purify blood. And bedbugs frequent the hiding places of beds. Others are born in the hair of living creatures, such as the louse, and a skin growth from sweat, more tightly confined and somewhat dried by the hairs. The excrements of living creatures are not only fertile for insects when separated from the body, but also when retained within it, as worms show, a problem most frequent for children, especially in the intestines. Recent experience of doctors has also taught that when diseases, especially pestilential ones, are often raging, worms are found in the extreme parts of the body where excrements are absent, not putrefied humors. Fleas, in particular, are produced by straw and matting somewhat moistened, or by the straw of a bed not exposed to the air; it is a received opinion that these are killed by scattering wormwood in those places. It has also been observed as true that bitter things contribute more to removing putrefaction than to promoting it; while fatty and sweet things especially contain the rudiments of putrefaction. There is a worm which flour produces, in the shape of a large white termite, a delight to the nightingale. Clothes and other woolen goods create moths, especially if you store them damp and wet, and it (the moth) delights in the flame of a candle. The earth also produces a worm within its bosom, named curculio (weevil), which feeds on roots, such as parsnips, carrots,

--- Page 450 ---
406        FRANCIS BACON'S
carrots, etc. The source of others is water, especially shaded and stagnant water, such as six-footed aquatic spiders; flies called phryganium, accustomed to be born from matter floating on the surface of the water, and usually found around lakes. Also, the dregs of spoiling wine are impregnated with a worm, which afterwards (as some among the ancients observed) changes into a gnat. And we owe to Antiquity, attesting from experience, that aging snow brings forth a worm of reddish color, slow in movement, surviving its birth for a short time. From this is argued the latent heat of snow, without which vivification would scarcely occur. The reason why that worm, once born, perishes so suddenly, could be the sudden exhalation of its tender spirit, once it has withdrawn from the surrounding cold and the cold in which it was enclosed. For as heat animates butterflies, which are torpid in cold; so predatory heat destroys those spirits which cold protects. It is an experience confirmed by the consensus of both Ancients and Moderns, that in brass and copper furnaces, into which chalcites (commonly called vitriol) is often thrown and smelted for correcting the operation, a fly suddenly emerges, which sometimes moves as if clinging to the sides of the furnace, sometimes is seen beneath the fire, and having left the furnace, perishes. Certainly an excellent instan-

--- Page 451 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 407
...a notable instance, and worthy of the attention of those who rightly judge, inasmuch as it shows that proportionate matter is vivified by the vehement heat of fire, just as by the gentle heat of living things. For it is a clear axiom of vivification, that heat is required for dilating the spirit of the body; the active spirit must be expanded, and the viscous and tenacious matter, which is the spirit's receptacle, must be drawn out into a configuration. The spirit dilated in a hot furnace immediately freezes at the sensation of moderate cold. Without doubt, this action also receives aid from chalcitis, for which the spirit is eager to produce and germinate, as is established by the evidence of chemical experiments. To conclude, from most putrefied things are born insects of various names, which I need not enumerate now.

697. The ancients teach that insects are nourished by a small amount, but this escapes the diligence of observers. For cicadas devour whatever is green in the whole region; silkworms quickly consume leaves; ants gather a large supply of food for themselves. It is true that animals accustomed to indulging much in sleep live on little food, such as dormice, bats, etc., for they are bloodless. The reason perhaps is that the juice in their bodies is unique, not truly blood, flesh, skin,

--- Page 452 ---
408      FRANCIS BACON

bones, as in perfect animals; while there is a great
variety of integral parts, but a small variety of similar ones.
Nor is it beyond the truth that some have a diaphragm and
intestines, and all have skin, which insects often
shed. In general, their life is shorter.
Bees, however, are found to live seven years;
and snakes are thought to attain a greater age, rather
because they repeatedly shed their skins. Eels, as
mostly the offspring of putrefying matter,
live very long and grow. Those which in summer
migrate from worms into flies, and in winter
return from flies into worms, when kept in boxes,
complete at least four years. There are, however, of the genus
of flies, which they call ephemera, allotted a life
of one day. The cause is the tenuity of their spirit,
or perhaps the absence of the Sun, since if exposed to the Sun
or more closely preserved, they could live longer.

To most insects (like butterflies and other
flies) life easily returns when they seem dead,
namely, by applying the Sun or fire.
The reason is the diffusion of the vital spirit, and its easy
dilation by a slight heat. For some time
their heads, when cut off, or their bodies divided
into parts, move; because their vital spirits,
loosely diffused through all parts, go out, and are less
fixed

--- Page 453 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 409
fixed than in perfect animals.
698. In insects, movement is voluntary, and therefore also imagination. But of the ancients who said that their movement is indeterminate, and their imagination indefinite, they betrayed their negligence. For ants directly seek their hiding places, and bees, not without the admiration of observers, discern the way by which they seek their hive from the flowery plain of the fields, through two or four miles. Perhaps in gnats and flies, imagination is more changeable and dizzying; just as some of the ancients attributed only touch to small birds. But they fell short of the truth; for if they tend directly somewhere, it is necessary that they be endowed with sight. Furthermore, they make a choice of the flower or herb in which they take more delight; therefore, they also possess taste. Bees are also recalled by the sound of agitated air; which argues for hearing, and, although their spirits go diffusely, that the seat of the senses is given in the head.
Furthermore, what matters pertaining to insects pressed themselves to be annexed to this topic, along with their enumeration, we relegate to the heading concerning animals in general.

S Expe-

--- Page 454 ---
FRANCIS BACON

***A solitary experiment concerning***
***running.***

**699.** The speed of a runner is increased by a weight held in the hands. The reason is, because a weight (namely, a proportionate one) by contracting the nerves, strengthens them. Where this contraction is not needed, the weight will be a hindrance; which is evident in a race instituted by horses. For they carefully take precautions, lest one horse be burdened more than another by even the slightest weight. In running with a weight, the arms are first pushed backwards, then forwards, with perceptibly increasing momentum; for the hands are sent back before they are moved forward. Inquire, whether a movement of the spirits contrary to the intended movement, and that immediately before we begin to move in the destined direction, causes the spirits, more vehemently impelled, to burst forth; just as a spirit drawn in and held back is expelled more vehemently. In throwing also, the arms are drawn back, so that the rotation may be stronger.

***A solitary experiment concerning the plea-***
***sures and offenses of the senses, espe-***
***cially of hearing.***

**700.** Before, we described musicians and un-

--- Page 455 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VII. 411
unequal tones, but not so exactly the
pleasures and offenses of the senses. Harsh
sounds, such as when a saw is sharpened, the grinding of
stone on stone, wailing, a rattling sound,
fill the body with horror or trembling,
and dull the teeth. The reason is that the
objects of the ears usually immediately
either pleasantly affect or offend the spirits. We
see that no color exists which greatly
offends the eyes. Spectacles full of terror,
such things occur to an excited memory, but
painted ones affect little. Smell, taste,
touch are affected by the body's participation or
impulse from the object. Sound alone is that
which strikes the sense without any intermediary and not through a body.
Music will have confirmed this, whether pleasantly
tempered into harmony, or harsh with dissonances. For all
sounds, whether high or low, there is
roundness and equality from their sweetness; to harsh
ones, inequality. For what else is dissonance
than a harsh concurrence of various voices?
It is true indeed that if a fixed inequality
does not dominate, but vanishes as if transient,
rather the sweetness is increased, as in the
whisper of a twisted string, the hoarse
clangor of a trumpet, in the pipe or nightingale-
flute of the greater and royal organ called
'philomela' by the English, and wherever dis-
                                 S 2                     cordiam

--- Page 456 ---
412      FR. BACON'S SYLVA, &C.
discord of sounds, soon followed, harmony absorbs
it. But if it lingers, it becomes unpleasant and
offends. Therefore, pleasure and offense
from sounds vary in three degrees:
of sweet sound, of dissonance, and of harsh sound,
which we designate by various names, such as a grating
sound or a sound that scrapes the ears; which we now
explain by describing. From the fact that teeth
are set on edge, it is clearly evident by what interval
the teeth and the organ of hearing are distant;
as if one end of a bow were held
while a string is struck.


      *End of the Seventh Book of the History*
            *Natural.*


                                    FRAN-

--- Page 457 ---
413

[Ornate woodcut headpiece with floral and scroll designs]

OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM
NATURAL
HISTORY
EIGHTH CENTURY.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*medicinal earths.*

701. [Large decorative initial M]There is a great variety of minerals and
fossils, but it has few veins
of medicinal earth. Its principal species are, Lemnian earth,
common sealed earth, Armenian bole; but the prerogative of dignity
is due to Lemnian earth. They are praised for their virtue
in the healing of wounds, staunching blood and repressing
defluxions and catarrhs, and, as it were, putting to flight poison,
contagion, and putrefaction, to prevent them from spreading
further. Among all simple remedies, they possess the most
perfect and purest drying efficacy, with little or no admixture
of other qualities. It is certain, however, that Armenian bole
has the greatest coldness, and Lemnian earth has heat;

S 3

--- Page 458 ---
414        FRANCIS BACON'S
heat; so that by this name fabulous antiquity
consecrated the Island of Lemnos, where it is dug up,
to Vulcan.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*the germination of sponges.*

702. Not far from the bottom of the straits
many sponges are gathered, collected from the sides
of rocks, which are nothing but abundant
and tenacious moss. These, however,
are all the more noteworthy because within the compass of a small
substance, imitating the configuration of a plant,
they rejoice in generative waters; for sometimes
they must be sought at a depth of fifteen cubits.
When drawn onto the shore, they feign the amplitude of a mass;
when compressed, they occupy the least amount of space.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*marine fish transferred into fresh*
*water.*

703. Fish accustomed to living in salt water
seem to prefer fresh water. Salmon,
Smelt, penetrate rivers, even
striving upstream. In the port of Constantinople,
not far away, a huge multitude of fish is gathered,
flowing in from the Black Sea,
who are intoxicated by fresh water, so that on
                                                                their backs

--- Page 459 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 415
...turned on their back, they may be caught by hand. I doubt whether it is sufficiently established what pertains to transferring fish from the sea into the fresh waters of lakes or ponds. The matter is both of great use and pleasure, since it is possible to have them fresh, even at a greater distance from the sea; not to mention that they can be nourished more agreeably and increased with new offspring. They say that Colchester oysters placed in wells, accustomed to be washed by the reciprocal tide of the sea (lest, however, fresh water be lacking, which may enter them with the receding sea), thus grow fatter and larger.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning attraction from similarity of substance.*

704. The shot of a Turkish bow is most vehement, so much so that it is established by fact that a steel shield or a bronze plate, of two inches' thickness, is penetrated by an arrow shot into it. But what you would wonder at more is, that an arrow furnished only with a wooden point pierced a wooden board, of eight inches' thickness. It is certain that in naval battles formerly there were in use short missiles which they called lemures or [a] flying spirits, with only a wooden point, accustomed to be shot from muskets, and penetrated the sides of ships impervious to a lead ball. But here a hidden mystery of nature
S 4 myste-

a] Sprights.

--- Page 460 ---
416      FRANCIS BACON'S
...mystery, and indeed one of the greatest;
that attraction is given due to similarity of
substance, if the body were not bound by the motion of gravity.
For if that [motion of gravity] could be removed,
lead would be attracted to lead,
gold to gold, and even iron without the intermediate
aid of magnetic force. But
the same motion of weight or gravity (which
belongs entirely to matter, having nothing of form)
destroys the other [attraction], unless the violence
of motion has rendered it [gravity] ineffective;
which this instance of arrows teaches.
For then the motion from similarity of
substance reveals itself. But concerning
this matter more fully in its proper place.

   *A solitary experiment concerning*
          *certain drinks in Turkey.*

   705. Turkey and the East have certain
confections in use, which they call *acherbeta*
in Turkish (or sherbets), not unlike candied glacées
or ice-like sweets. They consist of
sugar and citrons, or sugar and
oranges, or sugar and violets, and other
flowers; to which a little delicate ambergris is
mixed. From these, dissolved in water,
a drink is made, because by law it is not permitted to use
wine: But I am very surprised that by the English or Ger-
mans in Constantinople, a brewery

   a] *Sherbets.*

--- Page 461 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 417
brewery not established, so great is the abundance of barley in those
regions. That men in general are
water drinkers, may perhaps be attributed to a stricter
frugality, since it is no small saving
to quench thirst for free. But those
who have luxurious things at home would not
spare expenses. Yet I cease to wonder, whenever
I turn my thoughts to Italy, Gaul, Spain,
[which are] still deprived of beer;
by the use of which they might perhaps attend to their health and bodily
constitution.

      Various Experiments concerning
                sweat.

   706. A bath of hot water does not draw out sweat
from the parts under the water. The first reason
is, because sweat is a kind of liquefaction,
which only the driest or the most humid heat
produces. For excessive moisture somewhat
extinguishes heat, just as hot water [extinguishes] fire;
and excessively dry heat closes the pores.
Therefore, someone covered in the sun or by the fire
will more easily emit sweat than [someone] naked;
and earthenware bottles filled with hot
water provoke sweat in bed more gently
than hot brick baths. Secondly, hot water causes the skin to evaporate,
so that the material is consumed first in the parts
below the water, rather than being turned into sweat.
               S 5             pro-

--- Page 462 ---
418          FRANCIS BACON
may come forth. Then, moderately increased heat elicits sweat more copiously than heat that is at first more vehement and equally intense. The reason is that gentle heat opens the pores better than violent heat; with these opened, sweat flows out more freely. Therefore, physicians acted according to the dictates of reason, who, by applying bottles in bed, provoked sweat through sudorific herbs decocted in hot water, measuring the heat by degrees; so that a less hot bottle would take the first turn, and afterwards, a hotter one the second.
     707. The taste indicates sweat is salty. The reason is, because the fresh and sweet part of nourishment is changed into blood and flesh, but sweat is an excretory part. Raw blood surpasses flesh in saltiness, because assimilation into flesh does not occur without a slight and subtle excretion of blood.
     708. The upper parts of the body emit sweat more than the lower parts. The reason is, because those parts swell more with spirits, which propel sweat; moreover, they are less fleshy, from which and from drier parts sweat especially comes forth. Such are the forehead and the chest.
     709. Sleep excites sweat more than wakefulness, though it rather stops other defluxions than incites them; such as catarrhs, loose bowels, etc. The reason is, because sleep
                                                  and spi-

--- Page 463 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 419
and the spirit naturally acts inwards, there to
remain. But heat collected within breaks
out more strongly, and, being irritated, expels
sweat.
710. Cold sweats are often fatal
and indicators of death; but always malignant and
suspect, as in great fears, Hypochondriac
affections, etc. The reason is, because
cold sweat is caused either by relaxation
or by a faintness or desertion and
flight of the spirits, which allows the body's humor,
tightly retained by heat in the parts, to separate
and exit.
711. Those diseases which sweat does not resolve,
in them sweat, as if harmful, must be stopped;
as in diseases of the lung and fluxes
of the belly. Those which sweat cures by
purging out the malignity, there it is beneficial,
nor can it be difficult to tolerate, as in fevers
and pestilences, etc. The cause is, because
the latter sweat is partly critical and expels
the offending matter. But the former either
proceeds from the labor of the spirits,
and testifies that they are oppressed; or from
a movement by consent, when nature, being
unequal to expelling the disease in the place
it invaded, attempts a general expulsion
throughout the entire body.

S 6                                  Expe-

--- Page 464 ---
420 FRANCIS OF BACON

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*The Glow-worm.*

712. The nature of the Glow-worm has not hitherto been sufficiently explored. It is established that it is generated chiefly during the hottest months of summer, neither in fields, but in brambles and hedges. From this it can be understood the tenuity of the spirit within it, which cannot be attenuated except by summer heat; and furthermore, that this tenuity allows easy exhalation. Italy and warmer regions produce a fly, which is called lucciola there, shining like a glow-worm, and perhaps it is a flying glow-worm; but this fly especially frequents lakes and marshes. However, the two former observations can be referred here. For it is not visible except during summer; and sedges or whatever grows green around marshes, provide shade equally good as brambles. Perhaps the cold of other regions does not allow the glow-worm to grow to such an extent that winged ones are found.

*Various Experiments concerning impres-*
*sions from passions of the mind on the body.*

713. Passions of the mind here make impressions on the body, which are to be explained. Fear induces pallor, trembling, raises the hair,

--- Page 465 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII.   421
raises, causes recoil, horror and repercussion. Pallor arises from blood repelled to the aid of the heart. Tremor from the flight of spirits driven inwards, by which the extremities of the body are abandoned. On account of the closed pores of the skin is the erection of the hairs, which, lying obliquely, must necessarily be raised. Recoil is the apprehension of terrible things, and thus it is a contractive movement, and as it were an inquiry, as to what may be the origin of the event; and for this reason it is erective. Hence he who prepares himself for sudden listening recoils, for the spirits raise themselves to attention. Horror is an appetite for expelling that which suddenly struck the spirits. For it must be noted that very many movements, although useless for expelling annoyances, are irritations of nature, and produce movements by consent, as in groaning and wailing from pain.
  714. Pain and suffering cause sighing, hiccuping, groaning, trembling and wailing, or shouting, tears, distortion of the face, grinding of the teeth, sweat. Sighing is from a great abundance of spirits drawn to revive the heart, and is like a great draught in burning thirst. Hiccuping, from the same cause, but stronger. Groaning, trembling, wail-

--- Page 466 ---
422      FRANCISCI BACONI
wailing, from the urge to expel, as we said. For the spirits, being unable to shake off the harm, expel the voice by a sympathetic movement. And this happens if the spirits yield and succumb by resisting. For whoever constantly struggles against pain does not break out into groans. Tears, from the contraction of the spirits in the brain, which is followed by the constriction of fluid there, and thus the transmission of tears to the eyes. That compression causes the contortion of the hands, which is a gesture of emotional expression. Distortion of the face, from the effort, strengthened to endure and resist, then to expel; which first constricts the parts, then relaxes them. Grinding of the teeth, from the spirits compressed and gathered to resist, whence the teeth are firmly compressed. Sweating is a composite movement due to the struggling spirits, first so that they resist, then expel.
      715. From joy come cheerfulness and brighter eyes, which also excites singing, running, dancing, and sometimes even tears. All these things arise from the spirits being dilated and advanced into the outer parts, which expansion renders more vigorous and more mobile. It is known that sudden and immense joys have been the cause of sudden death for some, the spirits being dis-
                                          persed

--- Page 467 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 323
the spirits being scattered to such an extent that they could not return. Tears are produced from moisture in the brain due to the dilation of the spirits; which [spirits], when compressed by sympathy, squeeze out the brain's moisture, as we said, in pain. But then in joy it operates differently, namely, by the expulsion of moisture, when the spirits expand and occupy a greater space.
716. Anger in some creates pallor, in others a varied change of alternating color, in others trembling, swelling, in others it makes the mouth foam, others to strike their foot on the ground, to clench their fists. Pallor and the change of color variously alternating arise from the inflammation of the spirits around the heart, which, needing to be revived from external parts, draw others back. Even if pallor is solitary and color is not restored, it is usually combined with fear. But many cannot grow pale, only their cheeks and the lowest part of their ears reddening from the emission of spirits into the desire for revenge. Trembling from anger is also produced by spirits recalled inwards, usually when anger and fear combine. Swelling is produced by the dilation of spirits from excessive heating, and the liquefaction and ebullition of humors, which follows the dilation. Attribute the foam of the mouth to the same cause,

--- Page 468 ---
424      OF FRANCIS BACON
attribute [it], since it is an ebullition. Stamping or
clenching of the fist is from an imaginary
act of revenge.

717. A slight offense and whatever is less
pleasing, leads to shaking the head, and
wrinkling the brow. These are effects
of the same cause, producing trembling and
horror, namely, the retreat of the spirits,
but not so vehement. For the shaking of the
head is only a slow and definite tremor;
a gesture of slightly denying something.
And it is clear that from displeasure often
arises that gesture of the hand which is
usually applied only to denial or rejection.
The wrinkling of the brow and contraction
of the eyebrows, is a collection and compression
of the spirits for resisting to some extent. Such
a wrinkling also follows some study
and serious meditation, although
without offense.

718. Shame suffuses with redness, and
casts down the eyes. Redness is the return of
blood to the face, the part most affected by the
impression of shame. And although the redness,
spread throughout the whole chest, might overflow,
if it were exposed to the eyes, nevertheless, it is observed
in its passage towards the face. It casts down the eyes
due to a certain reverence for the dignity of the person,
so that one, seized by shame, cannot confidently
                                        look at another

--- Page 469 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century VIII. 425
cannot endure to look. Both shame and the casting down of eyes, however, prevail more when we stand in a crowd. What was more modest than Pompey's face? He never failed to blush in the presence of many. Illustrious persons too, and those whom dignity makes venerable, if we are to meet them, we suffer the same.

719. Sometimes pity expresses tears, and turns away the eyes, diverted elsewhere. A tear has the same cause as pain; since compassion is merely pain on account of another's misfortunes. We turn away our eyes, so that by that gesture we may signify that we detest or abhor that which excites pity.

720. From admiration we are struck dumb or remain fixed in an unmoving bodily state, we raise our eyes, we stretch out our hands. Stupor results from the mind's fixation on a contemplated object, which prevents it from being satisfied and from passing over it with fleeting attention, as is customary. For admiration does not allow the spirits to flee, like fear, but only stops them, and renders them less apt for movement. The raising of eyes and hands is a kind of appeal to God, who brings forth miracles from the treasure of His power and providence.

721. Laughter widens the mouth and lips, and continuously and sonorously expels the breath, of the sides and chest...

--- Page 470 ---
426        OF FRANCIS BACON
causes a shaking of the sides and chest, suffuses the eyes
with liquid, if it is violent and continuous.
Here first it should be *noted*, that laughter can scarcely properly be called a passion, its origin being derived from the intellect, since a concept of something ludicrous always precedes laughter; whence it is peculiar to man.
Secondly, the cause of laughter is merely a slight contact of the spirits, nor an impression penetrating so deeply, as other passions suggest. Therefore, it is moved with no affinity to mental affections, and indeed strongly from the mere titillation of certain parts in the body; so that someone, even with a mind composed to seriousness, sometimes cannot restrain laughter.
Thirdly, it is always conjoined with some delight, whence exhilaration has an affinity with joy, although the movement is much lighter; true joy is a serious thing.
Fourthly, its object is deformity, absurdity, misfortunes, and similar things.
Now let us speak of the causes to which the mentioned effects can be referred, from which some light shines forth from these general notes. For the dilation of the mouth and lips, the continuous expulsion of breath and voice, the shaking of the chest and sides, arise from expanded spirits, especially in sudden laughter. Also, eyes suffused with redness (as partly said before, where concerning

--- Page 471 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 427**
(where we have treated of tears and joy and sorrow) they recognize this as the cause of expanded spirits; to which its sudden origin also largely pertains; since we see misfortune added to misfortune or succeeding it, deformities, etc., provoke laughter in an instant, and if a short delay is interposed, the value of laughter diminishes. Thus, nothing obsolete, but whatever is new, moves the spleen; and tickling itself, even if the sides are gently pinched, if you forewarn, or if you handle roughly or continuously, is not very effective in producing laughter.

**722.** Lust makes the eyes glow and induces Priapism. The cause of both is that the pleasure of sight and touch excites the most ardent stimuli of desire, so that the spirits flow together to where the parts are most affected. It can be noted in general here (an observation that will be of great use) that in all passions the spirits are especially carried to the affected parts, and where the impression is stronger; as in those things we recently mentioned, to the eyes and parts dedicated to Venus; in anger and fear, they rush back to the heart; in shame, to the face; in slight annoyance, to the head.

**Various experiments concerning drunkenness.**

**723.** To the observation of antiquity, a reckoning/calculation...

--- Page 472 ---
The cause of this is that the spirits of wine oppress the animal spirits, having occupied the part of the place where they reside, and thus render them sluggish in movement. Hence he feels sleepy; and opiates and stupefacients (such as poppy, henbane, hemlock, etc.) induce a kind of appearance of drunkenness, by belching forth a cloud of thick vapors, as wine does, these (vapors) increasing too much. Moreover, the animal spirits are deprived of nutritive matter, which the spirits of wine consume just as much as they do; whence the animal spirits become weakened, and, being inert, do not obey the movements to be performed.

725. A drunkard persuades himself that everything is being carried away by an imaginary vertigo, and that things placed outside himself are rushing into his head. With wandering sight, he does not discern things far distant, he sees things brought closer not in their proper place, and sometimes everything appears double. The cause is

--- Page 473 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 429
Of such a rotation are the spirits driven in a circle, compressed namely by the vapors of wine (for compression makes any liquid rotate, as is clear in water); and as regards sight, it is the same, whether the visual spirits move, or the object, or the medium. Nor are we unaware that the same imagination arises from prolonged rotation of our body. The reason it believes external things rush into it is because the visual spirits withdraw themselves, with the result that the object seems to approach. Moreover, the feigned vertigo and motion also deludes them with an imaginary fear, lest indeed the moving things should fall upon them. That they do not see things far removed is from the weakness of the spirits; since migraine and vertigo produce a certain degree of darkness, and the appearance of rotation; which even lighter faintings confirm. That things are not seen in their proper place is from the refraction of the visual spirits. For vapor is an irregular medium, nor unlike the sight of things out of place in water. That all things appear double is the swift and restless movement of the spirits (when oppressed) back and forth. For as we said before, the movement of the visual spirits and the movement of the object produces a similar appearance. As for the swift
                                                                motion of the object

--- Page 474 ---
430          FRANCIS BACON'S
of the object, the string of a lute struck by a
plectrum seems to vibrate with a double trembling
motion.
     726. Smaller draughts intoxicate sooner than
large ones; sugared wine less than pure wine. The
reason for the former is that the wine does not
descend so continuously to the bottom of the stomach;
but lingers longer on the upper surface, and
transmits vapors the more to the head; and therefore
intoxicates sooner. So also a morsel soaked in wine
(provided the quantity is equal) intoxicates more
than the wine itself. The reason for the latter is
because sugar thickens the spirits of the wine, and
does not allow them to dissolve into vapors so easily.
They also report an antidote for drunkenness, if
sugared wine is drunk after pure wine. The same
aid is attributed to oil or milk taken after heavy
drinking.
     *A solitary experiment regarding*
          *the benefit or harm from wine*
               *even when taken moderately.*
     727. The use of wine is harmful to dry bodies
and those wasted by consumption, but beneficial to
moist bodies and those full of humor. The reason
is, because the spirits of wine consume the dew or
radical moisture (as they call it) of the body, and
in this way the animal
                                                            spi-

--- Page 475 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century VIII. 431

...the spirits of wine consume the dew or radical moisture (as they call it) of the body; and in this way, the animal spirits are deprived. Wherever moisture suffices or abounds, wine promotes the digestion and desiccation of moisture.

A solitary experiment concerning caterpillars.

728. The caterpillar is among the most common worms, usually produced from dew and leaves, for you may see swarms of caterpillars produced on trees and hedges, causing the greatest part of the damage to leaves on trees and hedges, because they are both born from them and nourished by them. Springtime is especially infested by this plague, because neither dew nor leaves are then lacking, and they are usually generated if the East wind has blown for a longer time. The cause is the dryness of that wind; since all vivification from putrefaction requires that the matter not be too moist. Moreover, what we see covered with spiders' webs, is a sign of slimy dryness; as in lands which spiders' webs cover, appearing from dew and sun. The inner parts of roses also produce green caterpillars, especially those that have not experienced strong winds, in which the dew becomes moldy, but cabbages produce the largest and most numerous caterpillars, with their fat leaves and suitability for putrefaction. Expiring summer shows the caterpillars to be winged, and changes them

--- Page 476 ---
432          OF FRANCIS BACON
and changes them into butterflies or another fly.
There is also a caterpillar with a woolly body, having a great affinity with silkworms.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
           *Cantharides flies.*

   729. Cantharides flies are generated
from a worm or caterpillar; but they infest certain
fruit-bearing trees more than others,
such as the fig, pine, and wild bramble;
all with sweet fruit, which proves some hidden
biting and acrimonious nature. For the fig
contains a milky sap, sweet and corrosive;
the pine nut is sharp and abstergent;
the fruit of the bramble is said to infect children
who eat it with scabies, so that it is not at all
surprising if cantharides possess a corrosive and
cauterizing power. For all other insects are generated
from coarser and duller material.
The body of cantharides shines with color; and perhaps
peacock-colored flies or [*a*] dragon-flies,
dyed with excellent color, have the same corrosive
power.

   *Various Experiments concerning weariness.*

   730. A bath cures weariness, or
                                          anointing.

a] *Dragon-flies.*

--- Page 477 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 433
Weariness is cured by bathing, or anointing with oil, or hot water. The reason is, because all weariness is a kind of bruising and compression of the parts, but bathing and anointing relaxes and softens; and oil mixed with water is better than when applied separately; because water penetrates the parts better, and the oil afterwards softens more effectively. Experience testifies that the use of tobacco drives away weariness. The reason is, because it revives and strengthens the spirits, it opens up bruised or compressed parts, and especially because by the benefit of its opiate virtue it refreshes the spirits, and thus removes weariness; as we also see happen in sleep.

731. When ascending a hill, the knees become weary, when descending, the hips. The reason is, because while one alternates the feet to overcome the mountain, the burden of the body falls upon the knees, in descent, upon the thighs.

   *A solitary experiment concerning the exuviae of certain animals.*

732. The exuviae of animals are compared by the ancients with the rupture of the afterbirth (or secundines); but less correctly. For each exuvia would be like a new generation. Moreover, the secundines are only a general covering, not adapted to the shape of the parts, but the skin equally re- [signature mark] T [catchword] spon-ds to the parts.

--- Page 478 ---
434      OF FRANCIS BACON
responds. Animals accustomed to shedding their skin
are, the snake, viper, cicada, lizard, silk-
worm, etc. Those, however, which cast off and renew
their scales, are the lobster, crab, tortoise,
snail, etc. It is established that the shed skins are found, but
the cast-off scales, not at all; so that it seems probable
that they shed their scales in such a way that they gradually
fall off; and the new scales are distinguished
by remarkable tenderness and softness, and in a certain
way by a flourishing color. The cause of the shedding of skins
and scales could seem to be a great quantity of matter
in these animals, which is naturally apt to produce skin
or scales; then the looseness of the skin or
scale, less tightly wrapped around the flesh.
For it is certain that the old skin or
scale is pushed out by the new. Thus in animals,
the new horn pushes out the old, and in
birds, new feathers push out the old. Those also
birds, which have sufficient matter for generating a beak,
renew their beaks, freshly-

--- Page 479 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 435
For the pores, it is most healthy. The cause is, because the stomach, being thus less pendulous, is strengthened. For we see that those suffering from stomach ailments are wonderfully helped by having their legs drawn upwards and their knees as if brought to the mouth; and those condemned to the galleys, even in their very miseries, are fat and as if having a well-kept body. The reason is, because a sedentary life in some way supports the stomach, which a standing life and frequent walking make pendulous. Hence, it is conducive to prolonging life to choose exercises that move the limbs more than the stomach or abdomen, such as rowing while sitting, or sawing back and forth.

734. Rising up, rather than sitting, produces headaches and dizziness from prolonged sitting. The cause is, because vapors, collected by sitting, seek the head more with sudden movement.

735. He who leans long on some part, renders it numb, and, as they say, 'asleep'. The cause is, the compression of the part, the interruption of

--- Page 480 ---
436          OF FRANCIS BACON
experience) brings into ill repute with suspicion of plague &
persuades that a multitude of frogs, flies,
and locusts, etc., will be unhealthy. The cause
is not to be sought from a hidden place, since these
animals, born from putrefaction, show the year
from its general disposition, and the constitution
of the air, as if conspiring towards diseases &
putrefaction. To the same prognosis (as
[a] said before) applies, if worms have conceived
the apples sometimes found in oaks:
for these represent a malignant temperament of the air
more subtly and closely than human sense can penetrate.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*a prognosis of a more intense winter.*

737. From the observations of country folk,
it is, that years in which there has been an abundance of fruit or
berries of the hawthorn, or of the scentless dog-rose,
portend harsh winters. They say the cause
lies hidden in the secrets of divine providence,
which (the sacred scriptures being witnesses) does not
neglect even sparrows falling to the ground, so that
it may all the more illustriously provide signs of itself in
preserving birds through those seasons of the year.
From an examination of nature, this cause may perhaps
be brought forth, that the preceding summer suffered
from a lack of heat and an abundance of
                                        moisture;

a] *See Century 6.*

--- Page 481 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 437
abundance; which the production of these fruits
proves. It is necessary, moreover, for cold
vapors to remain in great abundance, and not
to dissipate, whence the cold of the coming winter is
intensified.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*medicines that condense*
*and revive spirits.*

738. Among the Turks, there is a drink in use, which
they call Coffa, made from a berry of the same name, which
is blackish like soot, and has a pungent but not aro-
matic odor. That [berry], reduced to powder,
is taken by them in water so hot as to allow a
draught. They use that drink in their
taverns (which are called Coffa-houses),
strengthening the brain and heart and aiding diges-
tion. Indeed, this Coffa berry,
the root and leaf of betel, the leaf of tobacco, the
tear of the poppy (opium)—very commonly used by the Turks,
because they think it removes fear—condense the
spirits, and render them strong and cheerful.
But they seem to be distinguished by various modes of use;
for Coffa and opium are taken internally;
of tobacco, only the smoke; betel
is only chewed in the mouth, with a little
lime. That more things of this kind exist, if investigation
is not dormant and correction is not lacking, would not
be far from the truth. Inquire about hyo-
                                 T 3                                 scya-

--- Page 482 ---
438        FRANCISCI BACONI
scyamus, mandragora, of saffron both root
and flower, of Indian leaf, ambergris, Assyrian
amomum, if it can be had, and also of
the purple powder, which they call kermes,
and in general of all those things which
intoxicate and provoke sleep. *Note*, that
the root or seed of tobacco should not be taken,
as they are more potent than the leaves themselves.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
          *the painting of bodies.*

   739. The Turks have a black powder
made from mineral Alcohol, which
they smear on their eyelids with a thin brush
to blacken them, so that the white of the eye may shine forth. With the same
powder they dye their eyelashes and eyebrows [*a*]
adorned in the manner of an arch from a perspective view.
Xenophon recorded that the Medes applied
pigments to their eyes. The same dye
makes the hair and beards of the Turks black.
Our countrymen also, so that by feigned grayness
they may counterfeit the beauty of youthful
form, blacken their hair with various contrived
aids, and comb it with a lead comb or
similar implement. The Chinese, with their
poor bodily constitution (for they are olive-
colored), dye their cheeks using the artifice of
purple; especially the King and the Nobles.
                                                                 tes.

   a] *into Embowed Arches.*

--- Page 483 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 439
...nobles. In general, all barbarians who go naked not only dye themselves, but also cut and shave their skin, and adorn it with various works. The same custom is established among the Indians to the West; and was frequent among the ancient Picts and Britons; so that one might infer that men would adorn themselves with bird feathers, if any means were available; or at least wish to attest to a clean skin with the brightness of clothes.

*A solitary experiment concerning the use of bathing and anointing.*

740. We wonder that the use of bathing, a part of the regimen, has fallen into disuse. For Romans and Greeks, it was like food and drink. Today, among the Saracens, its practice has not perished; our people only recognizing it as a part of medication. I am of the opinion that bathing, in the way the Romans used it, was harmful to health, by softening the body and making it susceptible to consumption. For the Turks, their dietary regimen is more suited to it, since the drinking of water and the rice they eat, and other food of moderate nourishment, make their bodies solid and hard, so that the fear that the use of bathing might weaken them is vain. Moreover, the Turks enjoy a sedentary life, and rare walking,

--- Page 484 ---
440      OF FRANCIS BACON
and rare walking, with the result that less expelled sweat makes the bath more recommendable to them. Nevertheless, that in the bath, and especially in anointing, when rightly applied, there is an aid to health and to prolonging life. But these things elsewhere, among medical experiments, await an opportunity for discussion.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
         *wavy [a] paper.*

   741. The Turks are excellent makers of the paper which we call wavy; a skill unknown to our countrymen. They take various colors dyed with oil, and sprinkle them, drop by drop, onto the water, and gently stir the water, with which they then moisten somewhat thick paper, which draws the lines of undulating veins, like cloth or marble.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
           *cuttlefish ink.*

   742. One may wonder that for birds, and all beasts, and fish, the blood is red, but for the cuttlefish alone, it is black like ink. Perhaps someone might think that the cause is from blood very much overcooked; since we see in sausages of common use that blood turns black by boiling. The cuttlefish, however, is a delicacy, and is eagerly sought after.
   a] Chamolletting.                               Ex-

--- Page 485 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 441

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*the increase in the weight of earth.*

743. They report, whose credibility it is impious
to call into doubt, that earth taken from places
adjacent to the Nile, if both moistening and loss
are prevented, and if it is weighed daily,
remains constant until the seventeenth of June;
on which day the Nile swells; and its weight
increases until the river has reached its proper height. If
the truth of the account does not falter, it has its cause
from nowhere else but the air, which then
begins to condense, and thus changes into
moisture within the small amount of earth, [resulting in] an increase
of weight. It has also been discovered with
cut and weighed Tobacco, that some of its
former weight is lost if it is dried by fire;
and that after being exposed to the air, it recovers whatever
it lost. It can be seen that the swelling river
brings about some change in the entire body of air
flowing around it in the vicinity. For (which
has more significant causes for wonder) they truly report,
that on the day the Nile swells, severe plagues
usually arise in Cairo.

*Various experiments concerning sleep.*

744. Those who are very cold, especially in their
feet,

--- Page 486 ---
442        FRANCIS BACON'S
feet, sleep is hindered for them. The reason
could be that free respiration is required in sleep,
which cold harms by obstructing it. We see that
difficulty in respiration arises from sharp cold.
Another cause might be that cold summons the
spirits to its aid, so that, thus collected, they cannot
ascend into the head; which sleep always requires.
Hence both pain and noise are so many obstacles
to sleep, whereas darkness, on the contrary, promotes it.
    745. Certain noises (about which we
treated in Experiment 112) are favorable to sleep;
such as the blowing of wind, flowing water, the
buzzing of bees, soft singing, reading, etc. The
reason is that they excite a gentle attention in the
spirits, and whatever promotes this without heavy
labor calms the spirits, which are active with a
natural and discursive motion.
    746. Sleep nourishes, or at least preserves
bodies for a long time without food. Animals
that sleep a great deal through winter (which I
find noted concerning Bears) grow fat during sleep,
even without having eaten. Bats have been found
in ovens and other caves, packed one upon another,
whence the conjecture was made that they sleep
the entire winter and eat nothing. Inquire whether
bees do not pass the winter in sleep, and spare their
                                                               honey...

--- Page 487 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 443**
spare (honey)? Butterflies and other insects not only indulge in sleep, but rest as if dead, to be revived by a moderate heat of the sun or fire. Dormice live for several days in summer or winter without food by sleeping.

Various experiments concerning teeth and hard substances in the bodies of living creatures.

If a method of restoring teeth were available, one might boast of having discovered a mystery of nature; let men direct their thoughts to this matter. Be that as it may, the nature of teeth deserves investigation, as much as other parts of living creatures.
747. There are five solid and harder substances in the bodies of living creatures: the skull, a tooth, bones, horns, and claws/nails. The head everywhere displays many things of this solidity, as it has both the skull entirely of bone, teeth, jawbones, and that somewhat hard instrument of hearing from which horns emerge; so that the structure of living creatures is like the framework of a building,

--- Page 488 ---
444      OF FRANCIS BACON
(for they lack) an eggshell, and feathers, since a spur is nothing different from a nail/claw. But no animals which have a harder shell (such as oysters, conches, mussels, scallops, lobsters, crabs, freshwater turtles, the humpback shrimp, and especially the tortoise) have internal bones, but only cartilages.
   748. Bones, having reached the measure of their proper growth, remain in the same size; the skull also, and horns in some animals are shed and renewed; teeth, in a state as it were of growing, are not increased, except that use wears them down. Nails/claws grow continuously, also beaks, so much so that they protrude, which in eagles and parrots are changed.
   749. Most of the hard substances have withdrawn to the outermost parts of the body; such as the skull, horns, teeth, nails/claws, beaks. Bones alone are internal, covered by a mantle of flesh. All viscera lack bones; except that sometimes a bone has been found in the heart of a stag, perhaps also in other animals.
   750. The skull is the receptacle of the brain, which resembles marrow. The spine has an unformed marrow, with great affinity to the brain, and which is different from other bones of the body. The jawbones do not contain a peculiar marrow, but a little pulpy-

--- Page 489 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 445**
pulpy marrow diffused; also to the tooth is ascribed a kind of marrow distributed throughout its substance, which sensation and pain affect; and it is rather a nerve, since marrow is devoid of sensation, like blood. Horns are entirely similar parts, as are nails.

751. Among substances notable for their solidity, none is endowed with sensation except teeth; nor are they only sensitive to pain, but also to cold.

But other things by which the structure of a substance hardens, let us relegate to their proper place, content with the inquiry made concerning teeth.

752. Teeth in humans are threefold: sharp, like the front or principal ones; broad, like the molars; canine or pointed, placed between the former. But men have been found for whom there was a continuous bone instead of teeth, with a slight mark distinguishing each one; which is related concerning Pyrrhus. Some animals have oblong or projecting teeth, which bro

--- Page 490 ---
446 FRANCISCI BACONI
a varied series of teeth, as in pikes, salmon, trout, etc., and many other inhabitants of salt waters. Snakes and other serpents have venomous teeth, which you might sometimes wrongly take for stings.

753. Horned animals lack an upper row of teeth, and those which have an upper row are not deprived of a lower one. But nevertheless, in those animals of the same species, it does not follow that if hard substance is not changed into upper teeth, it goes into horns, nor the reverse. For fallow deer, which are not horned, lack upper teeth.

754. Three-year-old horses bear a tooth, which they call a gnomon, by which the youth of three years is recognized; and a four-year-old tooth by which the adult age of 4 years (is recognized). And that tooth has a hole capable of holding a pea, accustomed to diminish annually, until at eight years the tooth becomes smooth and the closed-up hole leaves no trace of itself; and then they say the mark in the horse's mouth has vanished.

755. Children cut teeth when they are one year or a year and a half old. At seven years, the first teeth are changed for new ones. In many, molar teeth emerge in the twentieth, thirtieth, and fortieth year. Inquire into the manner of their generation. They say that the Earl of Desmond, and an aged woman, as for example—

--- Page 491 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 447
inasmuch as she had extended her life to one hundred and forty years, had teethed twice or thrice, and had changed old teeth for new ones succeeding them as many times.

756. Sweets cause damage to the teeth, as also mercury ointment, and things too hot and too cold, and catarrhs. Toothache is considered most severe.

757. In teeth, these things are to be considered:
1. preservation.
2. care of whiteness, lest it perish.
3. extraction of them with less torment.
4. relief and remedy for toothache.
5. artificial insertion where they are missing, having been knocked out;
and finally, that restoration of great importance, where more advanced age has consumed them. Instances which in this last point offer some appearance of truth are, late teething in some individuals, the restoration of beaks in birds. These have the same material as teeth, as do horns. Therefore, more precise effort should be applied here in exploring the method. Hitherto, however, the art of stimulating teeth remains hidden. Therefore, let it be attempted whether it is possible to elicit horns in beasts that lack them, and how? and to cause them to grow larger than usual; as, for example, by which it may be possible to render the head of an ox or cow more ornate with large horns; and to make the horns that become more pointed in the subulate age more branched.

--- Page 492 ---
448 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;FRANCIS BACON'S
           branched. From such experiments it will be clear,
           how much art can dominate such a hard sub-
           stance. Consider also, what can be applied to birds still
           young, so that their beaks may become longer
           and larger, and their claws larger and
           longer; and for children, a tincture pre-
           pared or something similar, so that their teeth
           may be generated stronger and better. Crys-
           tal is recommended as something that will be an aid to teething
           infants.

           *Various Experiments concerning the Genera-*
                *tion and Gestation of Animals*
                                  *in the Womb.*

           758. Certain animals generate at certain times of the year,
           such as the fallow deer, sheep,
           wild rabbits, etc., most sheep and
           fish. Others at any time of the year, such as man,
           etc., and all domestic animals, such as horses,
           pigs, dogs, cats, etc. The cause of genera-
           tion at any time of the year is abundance.
           For superabundance promotes genera-
           tion; which flows from a twofold source: either the na-
           ture of the animal, if it is hot, hu-
           mid, or sanguine, or from co-
           pious nourishment. As for the first, man

--- Page 493 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 449
the most hot and most humid very often bring forth off-
spring; tame animals almost perpetually. The fallow deer is a melancholic and dry animal, which its timidity and the hardness of its flesh prove. The sheep is a cold animal, as appears from its gentle-
ness, and because they rarely drink. To most birds, the substance is drier than in beasts. Fish are cold as to the second cause, which is the abundance of food; man, cow, pig, dog, etc. are fed more abundantly; nor is it unclear that wild animals rarely pro-
create, tame animals more often; which both heat and abundance of nourishment provide. It is certain that the time for mating is observed by wild animals to be September, because whatever food and grass summer provides, yields into this procreative ability. The earlier September becomes wet with rain, the sooner they whelp; dryness delays it. The sheep also, being moderately warm, procreates around the same time or a little before. But for those for whom reproduction is fixed and cyclical, they devote their efforts to spring offspring, such as birds and fish; with the decline of winter and the heat and warmth of spring contributing to the preparation. Another reason also for a generation defined by its period, is the relation of gestation to the time of procreation, since no animal strives for a new birth while the female is pregnant, nor giving birth,

--- Page 494 ---
450        OF FRANCIS BACON
being in heat, or bringing forth young into the light.
Therefore experience dictates that, when eggs or
young are removed from the nest, they return to Venus (mating),
even repeatedly.
    759. For some animals, nature has prescribed a longer
or shorter time for carrying in the womb. A woman usually
completes nine months; a cow and a ewe, almost six;
deer nine; mares eleven; a dog nine
weeks. An elephant is said to carry its womb for a space of two years;
for whatever they claim about ten years savors of fable.
Two things present themselves in birds which fix
attention: what differs from coitus (mating), the laying
of the egg, and then from the laid egg, the breaking of the
shell (hatching). And in birds there is less diversity of
time than in other animals; yet there is some. For a hen
spends three weeks on incubation; an Asiatic hen, a goose,
a duck, a month. Inquire about others.
The cause of such great difference regarding time
among animals is either the nature of the species or the
constitution of the womb. As for the former, those which
mature more slowly are carried longer in the
womb; as we are taught by the example of man. An elephant
requires a long delay so that it may complete the proper
measure of growing up. But in most other species, the
constitution of the womb (that is, hardness and dryness) with the former
                                  cause

--- Page 495 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 451
cause combines. For a horse foal needs almost four years to mature, and so does a mule foal and a calf. But puppies, for whom the period of maturation usually comprises nine months, are carried in the womb for the same number of weeks. Birds, just as they bring forth their young in a shorter time, so too do they mature in a shorter time; most of them completing their growth within twelve months.

760. For some animals, a single birth provides numerous offspring; such as dogs, hares, rabbits, etc. Others are uniparous, such as a woman, a lioness, etc. This can happen due to the quantity of semen required for the production of one individual of that species; if less is required, a larger number can be produced, if more, a smaller number; or from divided uterine cells, into which the divided semen is separated.

Various experiments concerning
visible phenomena.

761. It is beyond controversy that light is augmented by refraction just as much as colored objects are. For just as the magnitude of a solid object increases at the bottom of water, so too does that of a candle, which is held placed in a lantern under water. I remember having heard of an experiment where glow-worms, inserted into glass and placed under water, were used to attract fish.

--- Page 496 ---
452 OF FRANCIS BACON
fish. But so far it is unknown to me whether a diver, carrying open eyes under the waves and floating on his back, sees things situated in the air as enlarged or diminished. For it is undoubted that if the eye is situated in a thinner medium, and the object in a thicker one, the presented image grows. Conversely, when the eye's rays pass through a denser medium, if the object is situated in a thinner one, what will happen is unknown to me.

762. It would be expedient to investigate more deeply whether reflection might not cause greater refraction than rays emitted directly. For example, take an empty basin, and place a gold coin or anything else in it; then move further away from the basin until the sight of the coin vanishes, as being out of the direct line of sight. Then let the basin be filled with water; reflection will represent it in a place not its own. Therefore, to proceed, insert a mirror into the water-filled basin; I suppose the image will not be seen directly, or at equal angles, but obliquely. I wonder if this experiment could not be arranged so that the image appears in sight, the mirror being undetected by the eyes. Here novelty vies with charm; the image, like a spirit, about to occupy the air and thus become visible. For example, opposite a cistern or marsh let there be placed

--- Page 497 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 453
let a picture of the devil or whatever you wish be placed, yet so that the water is not perceived by the eyes; and let a mirror be placed. If from an oblique angle, the picture of the devil strikes the sight, not the water, you will have the likeness of the devil appear before you. Now for a long time among the Oxonians (people of Oxford) the rumor holds that the Monk Roger Bacon passed through the air between two obelisks of two temples, which was then believed to have been done by means of glasses, although he was walking on the ground.

Various experiments concerning impulse and percussion.

763. A heavy body, once moved, is more easily impelled than the first time when it was at rest. The reason is, partly because motion dispels the inertia of a solid body, which besides the motion of gravity, also has in itself a natural desire for rest; partly also, because a body at rest suffers a stronger compression of its parts from the resistance of the body in which it rests, than it would have from itself; so that a greater force must be applied to dislodge it from its state. For if a heavy body is suspended, even by a thread, the impulse will be equally easy as if it were entirely in motion.
764. A huge or very small body so

--- Page 498 ---
654          OF FRANCIS BACON
cannot be projected as far as another of me-
dium measure, so that, according to the law of pro-
portion, a force commensurate with the body
moved, which moves it, seems to be required. The cause is, because
impulsion does not occur without the virtue of the moving body
and the resistance of the moved; but if the body
is of enormous magnitude, it yields more slowly;
if of smallness, it does not resist strongly enough.
     765. It is commonly known that no weight
presses and breaks so strongly if placed upon another
body, as if it is impelled or struck from above. Perhaps
something is to be attributed to the air in promoting
percussion. But the principal cause seems to me to be, because the parts of the body moved by impul-
sion or by continuous motion of gravity have compression downwards equally
as if projected and emitted through the air, forwards.
I also conceive that the swift relaxation of this motion
prevents the resistance of the lower body; the priority of forces
everywhere proving its efficacy, as appears in infinite instances.

     *A solitary experiment concerning*
               *tickling.*
     766. Tickling is most perceived in
the sole of the foot, under the armpits, and in the lateral ribs.
The cause is, the thinness of the skin, which these
                                             parts

--- Page 499 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 655
covers parts, also by rare contact of them. For all titillation is a slight movement of spirits, which thinness of skin, sudden and rare contact promotes. Thus a feather or reed lightly wandering over the lips or cheeks, excites titillation, not a blunter or harder contact. As for sudden contact, it is clear that no one is tickled by himself; also the palm, with skin equally thin as the parts already mentioned, does not admit titillation, due to the frequency of contact. Titillation also moves laughter. The cause perhaps, an emission of spirits and thus of the soul, by flight from titillation, in which a recoil and recession of the part is always noted so that it may avoid it. Also, when the nostrils are tickled internally by a feather or straw, they excite sneezing; which is a sudden emission of spirits, and expels humor. There is also titillation joined with pain, so that it cannot be tolerated.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*the scarcity of rain in Egypt.*

767. It is strange that, with the Nile flooding Egypt, as it is accustomed to happen, thin or no rains are felt in that region. The cause can be referred either to the nature of water, or of air, or of both. Of water, if also a longer [aspect] is considered

--- Page 500 ---
456      FRANCISCI BACONI
a course is given, that with a swift, rapid flow it exhales less than stagnant water; and its concoction, when properly concocted, does not evaporate as much as when raw, just as water boiling over a fire emits vapors more sparingly after a moderate interval from the first boiling than at the very beginning. It is also established that the waters of the Nile are found to be sweeter in taste than others, by common judgment; and are recommended for calculus and hypochondriacal melancholy; whence a soothing virtue is inferred; and are carried through a hot climate, a flat region not shaded by woods or mountains; so that it is necessary for the Sun, pressing down with great force upon the river, to remove its crudities. It can be attributed to the air (I conceive its role in this scarcity of rain to be primary) that it is thin by nature and thirsty, and eagerly absorbs watery moisture, and disperses it throughout its entire body in such a way that it does not allow it to remain in the form of vapors by which it might swell into rains.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
            *Clarification.*

   768. We have spoken under the heading of percolation (that is, internal percolation) that egg white and milk are used for clarifying liquids. The Egyptians prepare and clarify the waters of the Nile drawn into cisterns or stone vessels, and agitated with a few
                                             paucis

--- Page 501 ---
**Previous page text for continuity:**
456      FRANCISCI BACONI
datur procurſus,cum pernici rapta defluxu
minus exhalet quam ſtagnans ; & ejus
concoctio, cum probe concocta non adeo
evaporet ac cruda, ut aqua ſuppoſito igne
ebulliens parcius emittit vapores modico
à prima coctione interſtitio, quam ſub
ipſum initium. Conſtat etiam, aquas Nili
aliis dulciores guſtu arbitro deprehendi ;
in calculo quoque & melancholia hypo-
chondriaca commendari ; unde virtus le-
niendi arguitur ; & per clima calidum,
plana nec ſylvis aut montibus umbroſa
regione, deferri; ut neceſſe ſit Solem ma-
gna vi incumbentem fluvio adimere cru-
ditates. Aëri imputari queat (partes ejus
in hac pluviæ egeſtate primas eſſe conci-
pio) quod tenuis ex ſe & ſiticuloſus ſit,
aqueumque humorem avide abſorbeat,
perque integrum corpus ita diſpergat, ut
ſub vaporum forma remanere non patia-
tur quibus in pluvias intumeſcat.

   *Experimentum ſolitarium ſpectans*
            *clarificationem.*

   768. Diximus titulo de percolatione
(illa nempe interna) albumen ovi & lac
clarificandis adhiberi liquoribus. Ægyptii
aquas Nili præparant & clarificant hauſtas
ciſternis vel vaſis ex lapide, & agitatas cum
                                             paucis

---

SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 457
a few crushed almonds, with which they anoint the mouths of the vessels, and remove them when they have settled a little. It would be useful to transfer this experiment of clarification with almonds to fresh beer or must, so that the work of purification may be accelerated.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*leafless plants.*

769. Scarcely are plants found which, deprived of leaves, have branches; unless coral is excepted. But the deserts of St. Macarius in Egypt nourish a plant, long, leafless, of black color, branched like coral, except that its top is closed. That plant, taken into houses and placed in water, unfolds in a wonderful way; and a superstition has seized the people living in the vicinity, that it helps women suffering in childbirth.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*the material of glasses.*

770. For crystal glasses among the Venetians, the material is from stones mixed in equal proportion, which they bring down from Pavia by the Ticino river, and from the ashes of a certain noxious herb, called Kall among the Arabs, growing in the
V                                     desert

--- Page 502 ---
458      OF FRANCIS BACON
desert between Alexandria and Rosetta. To the Egyptians, this first provides use as tinder; afterwards they sell the ashes, compressed into a mass like stone, to the Venetians, to be for them the material for glassmaking.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning the pro-*
*hibition of putrefaction & the long pre-*
*servation of cadavers.*

771. The preservation of cadavers for many years, with the marks of their dimensions intact and not disappearing in any part, deserves no ordinary attention; as appears in Egyptian mummies, some of which are believed to have lasted three thousand years. Indeed, the method of removing the brain, and the viscera whose corruption you can scarcely prevent, is understood by them; but that is not so great as to express admiration. For we see how soft a substance flesh is, and most easily prone to putrefaction above the other parts of the body. But it could be seen from our observation and axiom, which we gave in the hundredth experiment, that putrefaction, in my conception, is a natural period of bodies, only an accident; nor is matter the cause of accelerated corruption. Whence it is established that bodies in shining amber, mercury, balsam (of which we have already spoken), wax,

--- Page 503 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 459
wax, honey, gums, and perhaps in snow-preservers
or snow-storehouses, etc., to be preserved for a very
long time. Nor is there any need, if we recall here
what was said in that experiment, to repeat
those things which pertain to annihilation.
For if the three things accustomed to causing putrefaction
are prevented, corruption can be entirely kept
away. The first is, that air be excluded, which
silently undermines the body, and as it were conspires
with its spirit towards dissolution. The second,
that what is around and adjacent to the body should
not be of the same material, but entirely heterogeneous
with respect to the body to be preserved; for thus
the one can receive nothing, and nothing can proceed
from the other. Such are Mercury, white amber
in herbs, flies, and bodies of that kind. The third,
that the body to be preserved should not be of such
a mass that it can spontaneously dissolve into corruption,
even if nothing of it exits into the adjacent body.
Therefore, it ought to be rather slender and small, than
vast. And a fourth aid is given, that if the body
to be preserved is of such a magnitude as it is usually
seen, then the containing body should be endowed
with the faculty of attracting and drying out the moisture
of the contained body, lest putrefaction, begun
internally, should gain strength, although nothing may exit.
Me- V 2                               mini

--- Page 504 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S
I remember Livy relating that once two leaden caskets were found in a certain monument; and in one the body of King Numa, in the other the books of sacred rites and the discipline of the Pontiffs were enclosed. The casket containing the corpse exhibited nothing but a few light ashes at the extremities; the other [casket] the books so unharmed and entirely free from damage, as if it had been a recent Scribe's writing. They were moreover written on parchment and covered with wax, of the kind used for candles in sacred vigils, as if with a wrapping repeated three or four times. From this you may gather that the Romans, during Numa's reign, did not equal the industry of the Egyptians in preserving bodies with balsam; whence followed the consumption of the body found. Plutarch and others note that when Augustus Caesar visited the tomb of Alexander the Great, the corpse was found with its dimensions whole and undisturbed. Balsam nevertheless, which it is fitting to have been most excellent, could not prevent the excessive softness of the corpse to such an extent, that from the mere touch of the nose Caesar disfigured the whole [body]. This increases my wonder, since Egyptian Mummies are said as it were to turn to stone. Nor indeed do I see a difference, except one, which greatly pertains to the matter; namely that ancient Egyp-

--- Page 505 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 461
Egyptian Mummies were wrapped in various linens,
anointed with gum, like waxed cloth; Alexander's
corpse lacked all of these.

A singular observation concerning the
abundance of nitre on certain shores.

772. Near the fortress of Catia, and the wells
of Assanios in Idumaea, along a long stretch of
journey, the sea, though rather distant, is perceived
as if it were near; the gleam of nitre from the sands
feigning proximity; such an abundance of nitre
overflows that shore.

A singular observation concerning
bodies which float on water.

773. The Dead Sea, yielding bitumen, is of
such a density that living creatures thrown into it
with hands and feet bound, floated on it and were
not submerged. From this we learn that sinking
under water is nothing other than the body's weight,
by which it exceeds the water's weight; so much
so that it (the liquid) can be rendered so heavy and
strong by mercury perhaps or similar substances,
that it suffices for sustaining iron. Of which thing
I see no use, but it provides an occasion for
imposture. The same principle will show that all
metals, except gold, float on mercury.
V 3 Expe-

--- Page 506 ---
462      FRANCIS BACON

A Solitary Experiment concerning a
  fuel which consumes little or nothing.

  774. They say that at the foot of a hill near
the Dead Sea, a black stone is found (held by
Hermits as an aid in preparing fire) which,
burning like coal, knows no diminution, but
increases in splendor and brightness. If this is
true, I do not indeed wonder, since iron glows
red from heat and is not consumed; but that it
endures for some time, that is what may be
wondered at; for the redness of iron, when
removed from the fire, immediately vanishes.
It would indeed be a matter of no small
convenience and profit if a fuel were devised
which, when lit, would both give light and last
for a longer space of time. Nor do I entirely
deny that candles are made from Salamander's
wool, a kind of metal, which, when inflamed,
glows white-hot and is not consumed. The
question is, what feeds the flame, and usually it
is a tangible body consisting of weight. But it
seems possible that a spirit or vapor (both
devoid of weight) might excite it in a body;
such as the material of ignis fatuus. You might
perhaps object that this vapor, about to expire
shortly, would fade away. It will be replied that
by means of oil and wax, or other material
destined for making candles, the flame can be
nourished, without the wick being lit.

--- Page 507 ---
      SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII.   463

A Solitary Economic Experiment
    concerning cheap fuel.
  775. Fossil coal lasts longer than
that from wood, and coal from roots, cut into large
pieces, lasts longer than that commonly used from wood.
Common turf and that from heather are of low price,
and are long-lasting fuels. Coal from branches and
shrubs or thorns, placed on top of coals from vigorous
wood, provides fuel for a long fire.
Sedge is a cheap fuel, frequently used by brewers
and bakers, otherwise useless for other purposes. Let
earth or chalk mixed with fossil coal be investigated. This
mixture (which coal-merchants are accustomed to
use clandestinely), if applied to make the mass of
coal appear greater, is a fraud; but if only the pursuit
of knowledge is considered, it would be a matter of advantage.

  A Solitary Experiment concerning
    the collection of wind for cooling.
  77

--- Page 508 ---
464      FRANCIS BACON
...to have devised, for the burning heats of the year, things which might refresh by a gentle diversion of derived wind and air. But those are nothing but compressions of wind and its new expansions, and they cause it, when reverberated, to go more in a circle, than the contrivance of small pipes in walls.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning judgments about the salubrity of the air or the contrary.*

777. One ought not to apply oneself idly to this, that, whatever bodies or places you may choose, the salubrity of the air or the contrary should be explored, both as regards the seasons of the year, and the inhabited region. It is certain that in some buildings there is more, in others less, danger to stored provisions and baked goods from mold. Nor would I rashly persuade myself that meat or fish sooner feel harm in this air than in that. Excellent are the experiments which shed light on such things not yet fully understood: for they are useful for natural prognostics of weather, better than the aids of astronomical skill. Moreover, they teach men what locations are to be chosen for habitation, so that health may be safe, and better provided for.

                                          Expe-

--- Page 509 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 465

A solitary experiment concerning the in-
crease of milk in milk-producing
animals.

778. A stone is found near Bethlehem which,
reduced to powder and thrown into water, by drinking
which cattle are refreshed, distends their udders with
increased milk. It would certainly be more useful to try
a mixture of waters in ponds for the benefit of cattle,
so that they may provide more milk, or grow fatter, or
be protected from disease. Perhaps chalk and nitre
might best constitute and temper this mixture.

A solitary experiment concerning sand
which resembles the nature of glass.

779. It is reported that in a valley near
Mount Carmel in Judea there is sand of the greatest
affinity with glass; so much so that it turns minerals
found there into the substance of glass without the aid
of fire, and glass into [a] primordial sand. A wonderful
thing, if we are not deceived by a fiction. And it seems
to bear a resemblance to truth, in that it might arise from a
natural furnace or subterranean heat. No mention,
however, is made of an erupting flame. But it would
be expedient to refer that to glass-making materials
V 5 vitra-

a] Mother-Sand.

--- Page 510 ---
466 OF FRANCIS BACON
for glass-making, whether, when raw materials are mixed with glass already melted down and re-liquefied, they require less heat for facilitating the making of glass.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
          *the germination of coral.*

   780. On the southern coast of the Sicilian sea many corals are collected. This plant is submarine, lacking leaves, only branched under water, soft and of a green color, but exposed to the air it hardens, with a reddish splendor mixed in, as is known. They say it also bears white berries, but not yet transported with the corals; perhaps considered refuse there. But the nature of the plant must be more accurately revealed by a deeper investigation.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
          *the collection of manna.*

   781. Calabria produces the best manna and in abundant yield, which it collects from the leaves of the mulberry tree, (the mulberry trees are) far different from those which grow in the valleys. Manna, like other dews, falls onto the leaves during the night. Perhaps someone might think that dews of this kind are dispersed so that they do not remain, before they adhere to the leaves of trees in the valleys. It might also seem that there is a coagulating power in the leaves of the mulberry tree,
                                        power,

--- Page 511 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 467**
power, by which the dew is thickened, because it is not seen on any tree except that unique one. Silkworms, accustomed to being nourished by those leaves, also sufficiently show that it has a delicate and uniform sap. Add to this, that the leaves (especially of the black mulberry) are a little rough, and therefore more suitable for preserving the dew. It would certainly be worthwhile to deem worthy of diligent and accurate investigation the dews accustomed to settling on mountain trees and herbs. Perhaps it happens that many are dispersed before they reach the valleys. And I am entirely of this opinion, that if the best May dew is to be collected for medicinal uses, it must be sought in the mountains.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*the correction of wine.*

782. A method is circulated by which Greek wine is prepared so that it does not evaporate or intoxicate, by adding a little sulfur or alum; of which the former is unctuous; the latter astringent; nor is it doubted that these two very well prevent evaporation. Let that be transferred to other wines and beers of better quality, by adding substances of a similar nature while they are fermenting, so that they both evaporate less and become more potent.

V 6      Expe-

--- Page 512 ---
FRANCIS BACON

*A solitary experiment concerning the matter*
*of artificial fire [a] from sulphur,*
*bitumen, and gunpowder.*

783. A not improbable reason has been devised by some, why artificial fire (which is principally bituminous) cannot be extinguished by water, because bitumen first congeals from fire and water mixed, but not sulphur. This is attested by a place near Puteoli, called Vulcan's court, which sends forth horrible thunder from water and fire mutually vexing each other in conflict, with the eruption of hot waters through siphons. Moreover, there is a great quantity of bitumen there; whereas the fires of Etna and Vesuvius, and similar mountains, which are sulphurous, belch forth smoke, ashes, pumice, not water. They also report that bitumen mixed with glue and placed in water, as it were, hardens into the substance of an artificial rock.

*A solitary experiment concerning a plaster*
*hardening like marble.*

784. A cement is given, made from flour, egg white, and stones reduced to ashes, which hardens like marble, with which a wonderful pool near Cumae has its walls encrusted.

a] *Wild-Fire.*

--- Page 513 ---
SYLV.˙SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 469
its walls incrusted. Certainly it is known from experience that a
powder of magnet and iron slag, with the addition of egg
white, and dragon's blood resin, reduced into a paste,
acquires the hardness of stone in a few days.

A singular experiment regarding a judgment
     on the healing of certain
          ulcers and wounds.

785. The ancients reported that in bodies full of humors and impure, wounds of the calves are healed with difficulty, but those of the head more easily. The reason is that ulcers and wounds in the calves require desiccation, which the downward flow of humors impedes, while ulcers and wounds of the head do not require it, but on the contrary, dryness prevents them from being conveniently consolidated. An observation of our time has found a similar difference between an Englishman and a Frenchman; the former having a humid, the latter a dry bodily constitution; so that a head wound in a Frenchman, and a calf wound in an Englishman, is more difficult to heal.

A singular experiment regarding
     the healthfulness and unhealthfulness
          of the South wind.

786. The ancients report that South winds, blowing
                                        continuously for a long time under a rainy sky,

--- Page 514 ---
470          FRANCIS BACON'S
create a sickly plague of the year, but if
they are moistened by rains sometimes interspersed,
the suspicion of a fatal pestilence ceases.
The cause is, because South winds by themselves
infect the air with a feverish quality, but from
conjoined rains a cooling tempers the heat
[a] as if suffocating. But maritime regions reject
these things, with vapors from
the sea, sufficiently without rain, moderating the heat.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
               *wounds.*

   787. The same antiquity has transmitted to us in writings,
that wounds inflicted by brass are cured more easily,
than those by iron. The cause, that brass
possesses a healing virtue, and thus brings immediate
remedy. Iron, however, has the power of corroding, not of healing;
so it would be useful, if the instruments of surgeons,
to be used for curing wounds, were made of
brass rather than iron.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
      *mortification from cold.*

   788. In regions harsh with frost and a more inclement sky,
noses and ears mortified and as if seized by gangrene and cold
                                             affected

   a] *Sultry Heat.*

--- Page 515 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 471
seized [by cold], if they are brought near fire, they immediately putrefy. The cause is, because fire suddenly draws out the few spirits remaining in the affected parts, so that the incipient putrefaction is thus completed. Snow, however, applied to them is beneficial, for it preserves the surviving spirits until they revive. Moreover, it consists of hidden heat; as a Monk proved from sacred text; who "gives snow like wool, scatters frost like ashes." From which he inferred, that snow would warm like wool, and frost would erode like ashes. The use of warm water would also be beneficial, because it gradually opens the pores without sudden action on the spirits. From this experiment, the treatment of gangrenes could be aided, whether those arising spontaneously, or those induced by an excessive application of opiates; in which dry heat is to be avoided, and recourse should be had to refrigerants, which possess the capacity to foster internal heat and strength.

Experimentum solitarium spectans
pondus.

789. Let the weight of iron and aqua fortis be explored separately, in which the iron is dissolved; examine the weight of the dissolved [substance] anew, you will find it the same as the body weighed separately; although a large part
                                                              tem

--- Page 516 ---
472        FRANCIS BACON
part in the form of a thick vapor might have been consumed by exhalation during the operation. From this it appears that the dissolved body increases in weight. We tried this repeatedly, but I do not know whether a hidden error in the experiment might have deceived us.

*Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the floating of bodies.*

790. Take two ounces of aqua fortis, and as many drams of quicksilver (for aqua fortis can support that weight); if you dissolve it, it will not support a flint stone the size of a nutmeg. Nevertheless, however, water increased in weight increases its carrying power; just as brine, having enough salt, will carry an egg floating. I remember baths from a certain mineral having been used by a physician for the cure of gout, etc., where a body placed in the bath did not descend as easily as in ordinary water. But it seems the weight of the quicksilver, though greater than that of the flint, compensates for the flint's weight no more than the aqua fortis [does].

*Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the flight of an unequal body in air.*

791. A body of unequal weight (such as of wood and lead, or bone and lead), if it is thrown with its lighter end forward, will ob-

--- Page 517 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 473
facing forward, it will change its position, and the heavier end will precede, unless the excessive length of the body prevents it. The cause is, because a denser body suffers a more vehement pressure of its parts from the initial impulse; and this is the cause (although hitherto unknown, as has often been said) of all violent motion. And since the posterior part moves more quickly (because it suffers less compression of its parts) than the anterior part can yield its place, it is necessary for the body to turn: for when turned, it is able to draw the lighter part forward more easily. Galileo rightly notes that if an open trough, full of water, is impelled more strongly than the water can follow, then the water collects in a heap towards the posterior part, where the motion began. He (confidently assuming the motion of the earth) established this as the cause of the ebb and flow in the sea, because the earth moves more quickly than the water. Although this theory is false, yet the former experiment is true. The unequal pressure of parts manifestly appears if you take iron or flint, and another body is wood, of the same magnitude and form; when projected with an equal exertion of force, the wood will almost be left behind, as the stone or iron travel further.

                                                Expe-

--- Page 518 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*water as a medium for sound.*

792. It is beyond controversy (as we have
partly [a] said before) that water can
become a medium for conveying sound. The collision of two
stones under water produces sound; as does
a long pole struck by pebbles under water. If
anyone thinks sound ascends by means of the pole,
let him observe an anchor lowered by a rope
making a sound, even though the rope is not
a solid body through which the ascending
sound is communicated.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning the flight*
*of spirits from unpleasant objects.*

793. Objects that greatly offend the senses
compel the spirits to retreat, and when these
are scattered in flight, the parts are abandoned,
whence trepidation and horror. As for sounds,
it is found that by the sound of a reciprocating saw or other
sound that is harsh, the teeth are blunted, and the body
is thoroughly permeated by an insinuated horror.
As for taste, we feel the head and
neck shudder from a draught of medicinal potion or taken pills.
Unpleasant odors do the same;
but that effect is less perceived, because by stopping the nostrils, a remedy
                                  offen-

[a] *See Century 2.*

--- Page 519 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 475
we have a remedy for the offense readily available. But
as for horses, where that method of hindering
does not apply, we see how the stench of a corpse,
especially of a horse, drives them into flight as if
seized by madness. As for touch, if you suddenly
withdraw from the sun into the shade, coldness
and horror are aroused throughout the whole body.
Moreover, even sight, so that one who is struck by a
truly unpleasant object, by a sudden movement into
darkness, horror strikes him.
   *A solitary experiment concerning*
          *a reflected Echo.*
   794. At Ticinum in Italy there is a temple
windowed only at its highest part, 100 feet
in length, 20 in width, and about 50 in
height. In its middle there is a door, reflecting
the voice twelve or thirteen times. If you stand
at the extreme wall opposite the door, the Echo
vanishes and perishes gradually, like that at [a] Pontcha-
renton. But the voice sounds as if it proceeds
from the part where the door is higher. But if you stand
in the lower part, or at either side of the door,
it ceases. If you stand in the doorway, or
in the middle opposite the door, it does not allow
itself to be heard. *Note*, that every reflection of sound
occurs better towards old walls than new ones,
as being drier and more hollow.
                                   Expe-

   a] *See Exper.* 249.

--- Page 520 ---
476 FRANCIS BACON

Solitary Experiment concerning the power
    of imagination to imitate sense.

    795. Those effects which senses, when struck,
produce, and which flow from actual things,
in some way also depend on imagination.
Hence, he who observes another eating sour
and tart things, and those things by which teeth
become dull and blunted, carries an imagination
imbued with this object, so that from the
sight of another's action, he feels his own teeth
blunted. So he who sees another driven in long
circles, or wheels often going in a circle, he
himself is seized by dizziness; and placed on
high without obstructing barriers or restraints
(unless habit has made it easy), will cling,
wavering with uncertain steps. Many also, from
the sight of another's blood, torture, or strangulation,
suffer a fainting spell as if their own
blood were flowing and they themselves were
being afflicted.

    Solitary Experiment concerning
        the preservation of the body.

    796. Take a clove flower and gently
tie it to a stick. Place both into a glass
[a] slightly inclined or sloped around the mouth,
which you have filled with quicksilver,
                                                                so

    a] Stoop-Glass.

--- Page 521 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 477
so that the flower is covered. Place a moderate
weight on the mouth of the glass, so that the stick is
pressed down. After four or five days have
passed, return to inspect; and you will find the flower
fresh, with a stem harder and less flexible
than it was; if you place another flower next to it
for comparison, which you gathered at the same time,
the difference will be more manifest. From this
it appears that quicksilver is best employed for
preserving bodies, which not only protects,
but also hardens by cold. As for the vigor
of the flower; it could be mere preservation
(which is all the more to be observed, because quick-
silver presses down the flower) but the hardness
of the stem, without the hardening faculty from the cold
(as it seems) of the quicksilver, cannot be.

A solitary experiment concerning the ger-
mination and multiplication of metals.

797. From the accounts of the ancients we have
that in Cyprus a kind of iron is found, which,
if cut into small pieces and placed in the earth,
and then watered, grows larger. It is
also certain, and supported by the testimony
of antiquity, that lead multiplies, and
increases in yield; as we see in ancient
stone statues, which, placed in cellars and
bound with leaden foot-chains, showed

--- Page 522 ---
478          FRANCIS BACON
showed that with the passage of time the lead had swollen,
so that it adhered to the stone like a wart.

   *A solitary experiment concerning*
      *the submersion of a baser metal in*
               *a more precious one.*

   798. I call that submersion of metal,
when a baser metal is so incorporated into a more precious one
that it cannot be entirely separated. This is a kind
of transmutation, but a spurious one; as if silver
were inseparably incorporated into gold; or copper
or lead into silver. Ancient electrum,
in comparison to gold, was five times the value of silver;
and a composite metal is produced,
equally suited for various uses as gold,
with greater splendor and some prerogative of qualities.
But it admitted such easy separation. If anyone secretly
works on this matter, or with the composition disguised
passes it off as a simple precious metal,
it is an imposture of adulteration. But if it is
attempted deliberately and without deceit, it would be a great
saving of the more precious metal.
I remember having heard from a man most skilled
in metallurgy, that a fifteenth part
of silver incorporated into gold cannot
be recovered by any separating liquid, unless a larger
quantity of silver is added to attract
the smaller [quantity]; which, as he used to say, the ultimate
                                             separa-

--- Page 523 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 479
is the ultimate refuge of separation. But this method is complicated by difficulties, so that hardly anyone would undertake to explore it. More accurately, that should be investigated, and the quantity of the fifteenth part should be changed to a twentieth, with a slight addition besides, so that intrinsic incorporation may be promoted. Note, a mixture of silver with gold is detected by a weight test, if it is compared with its dimension. But lead in silver (since it is a heavier metal) cannot be detected; if the excess of weight in the lead is above the weight of the silver.

*A solitary experiment concerning the fixation of bodies.*

799. Gold is a substance that contains nothing volatile, and yet it melts without any difficulty. Melting shows that it is not empty, or devoid of spirits, so that its fixation is not a defect of spirits, causing them to exhale, but an equal distribution of tangible parts, and their tight compaction, whence they have less desire, nor any reason to escape. Therefore, it would be expedient to try whether anything of weight departs from glass after it has been re-melted, for the parts in glass are equally distributed but not so compact as they are in gold; as is evident from the fact that it readily admits

--- Page 524 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S
admits light, heat, cold, and becomes slight in weight. Other bodies are fixed, endowed with few or no spirits; so that nothing can exhale. Such is the material from which goldsmiths' [a] cupels are made, which they place in furnaces, unharmed by the force of fire. Therefore, there are three causes of fixation: equal distribution of spirits and of tangible parts, and their tightening, and the scarcity and extreme comminution of spirits; of which the two former are compatible with a nature apt to be liquefied, but the last one is not.

*A solitary experiment concerning the rest-*
   *lessness of natural things in themselves*
      *and their appetite for change.*

   800. Deep is the contemplation of nature, if one considers the need (so to speak) and dissatisfaction of various bodies, and their appetite for admitting others. Air imbibes light, sounds, odors, vapors; and it is manifest that this is done by it with a certain as it were avidity, as if it were not content with its former consistency; otherwise indeed it would never admit them so easily and suddenly. Water and liquids suddenly receive dry and more earthy bodies proportioned to themselves; dry bodies in turn imbibe waters
                                        and li-

a] Coppels are made.

--- Page 525 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. VIII. 481
and liquids; so that one (which he among
the ancients said concerning terrestrial and aqueous sub-
stances) may be a glue to the other. Membranes, skins,
garments, etc., receive liquids within them-
selves, although they are intact bodies, and by no
means having parts so gaping as sand
and ashes, nor porous to the senses. Metals them-
selves are readily imbued by strong acids,
and it is in this way that these penetrate metals and
stones. Aqua fortis, effective on gold, is weak
on silver and conversely. Gold, which
you would consider the most compact and solid body
by weight, eagerly imbibes Mercury.
Nor does this reception of other bodies seem violent;
for it is often reciprocal and as if by consent.
Concerning the causes of all these things, and to what ax-
iom they can be referred, one must think carefully.
That charming idea, that matter is like a
harlot prostituting her body, because she desires all
forms, is merely a vague notion. Flame
alone does not admit any body, but either
overcomes it, or converts it into its own nature
as a conqueror, or destroys and extinguishes itself.

*End of the Eighth Century of Natural History.*

X FRAN-

--- Page 526 ---
482

[A decorative woodcut header with floral and mask motifs]

FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM
NATURAL HISTORY
NINTH CENTURY.

*Various experiments concerning perce-*
*ption in insensible bodies, ten-*
*ding towards natural divination*
*or subtle experiments.*

[Decorative initial I] t is among the most established truths that all bo-
dies, whatever their nature, even those devoid of
sense, possess some faculty of perceiving. For when
body is applied to body, something akin to choice is
observed in admitting what is agreeable, and in excluding
and rejecting what is disagreeable. Perception, always
preceding action, also distinguishes the altering body
from the altered body; for otherwise, all bodies would
be indifferent to one another. This power of perceiving
far surpasses the subtlety of sense, which comparison
demonstrates to be crude compared to it. Thus,
thermometers or the psychiologion reveal the heat or cold
of the air, even when very slightly varied, which men
would otherwise anxiously exhaust themselves trying to
detect. That perception is sometimes at a distance,
sometimes by contact; as when a magnet attracts iron;
or a flame seizes Babylonian naphtha from a great
                                                                           [end of page, "great" cut off]

--- Page 527 ---
great distance. Therefore, let investigative curiosity be occupied not without glory, which with zeal grasps the subtlety of perception; making it an alternative key for unlocking nature to that of sense, to which (sense) perception is often preferred. It is also the foundation of reason, which animates natural magic, and whatever here presents itself later becomes manifest in great effects of things. Nor does it serve so much to reveal secrets as it aids predictions of future events, as the subtlety of many experiments teaches. For example, when doubting whether seeds are old or new, the reliability of sense fails. If they are boiled in hot water, you will distinguish the new ones by their quicker germination. Of better water, taste is not the indicator, but its sudden consumption; and in other things described previously, it is more safely believed. In Physiognomics, the features of the body will reveal silent impulses which nature arouses, for concealing which dissimulation offers a pretext, or for overcoming which doctrine has been a master. Therefore, for our present undertaking, we prepare material for only a twofold perception, both of which favor natural magic or revelation; setting aside now, and to be rendered elsewhere, the treatise on perception concerning other matters. It is indeed true that other paths also lie open by which one may enter the inner chambers of divination; such as if the causes are not hidden, or if you know the accompanying circumstances, it will be possible to form a judgment about the future effect; which must also be said concerning revelation. But our work will primarily be concerned with that divination and revelation which nature and subtle perception suggest.

Air or water secretly inclining to corruption and putrefaction must undoubtedly be subjected, as it were, to the examination of the inquirer, before a manifest plague and a deadly year come upon trees and crops. So in other things. Therefore, we will propose prognostics of seasons suffering from plague and unhealthiness.

X 2 801. De

--- Page 528 ---
**484. FRANCISCI BACONI**
**FRANCIS BACON'S**

**801.** We have previously discussed the South wind blowing for a long time without rain, or worms in galls or oak-apples [a]; and how a multitude of frogs, cicadas, flies, and similar creatures born from putrefaction portends pestilential years.

**802.** Great and unseasonable heats, which spring (especially May) brings without winds, offer the same omen; and in general, years with rare winds and thunder.

**803.** Notable summer droughts, which extend until the end of August, and the moderate rains that follow them, with the sky then drying up again, presage an inauspicious summer for the following year. For the end of August consumes the sweet vigor of the earth, by which plants and trees are animated, once it has been exhaled (the more so, the drier it is), so that the earth can then return nothing but thick vapors, a certain harm to the air. To those vapors, the first rains, if they are moderate, give space to erupt copiously. Whence those who go out in public shortly after the rains have fallen are usually seized by illness; at which time Africans entirely abstain from public [places]. But if more abundant rains fall, they more suitably wash and replenish the earth, which immediately

a] See Experiment 734.

--- Page 529 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 485
rather than immediately allowing [vapors] to exhale. If the dryness of the sky
returns, then it as if fixes and continues the air's
corruption after the earlier rains, and deeply insi-
nuates the seed of future evil into the very next sum-
mer; unless the sharpness of cold disperses it,
which droughts of this kind rarely have succeeding them.
804. Contagions and minor infections
of smallpox and purple fevers and
minor fevers remaining from the preceding summer,
if they have lasted through the entire winter in a dormant state,
are signs of a plague that will rage in the next summer.
For putrefaction is not begun and perfected all at once.
805. Raw meat or fish exposed to the naked air,
if they quickly contract putrefaction,
is a sign of air disposed to putrefaction. But because
you cannot be certain about the speed or slowness
of putrefaction, unless by an experiment of this and another year placed side
by side; it would be worthwhile, in the same
year and at the same time, to expose one piece of meat
or fish to the open air, and another of the same kind and thickness,
to the inside of a house. For I establish that if a universal
disposition imbues the air with putrefaction,
meat or fish will putrefy faster outside,
where the air is more effective, than under a roof, where
it is less potent; since there is not one way of correcting it
X 3 ibi

--- Page 530 ---
486          OF FRANCIS BACON
a method of correcting it is given there. The time for this experiment is the end of March, the most suitable weather for detecting both the effects and operations of the past winter and the coming summer in the air. That [air] also, because it undoubtedly receives great impressions from the earth, it would be expedient to try what would happen if meat or fish were suspended on a wooden pole at some distance from the ground, and kept placed on the surface of the earth.
     806. Let it be inquired whether May dew quickly rots or not, since it is not a small matter for indicating the quality of the air or vapor from the earth, whether more or less corrupted.
     807. The dryness of March and May, with a rainy April interspersed, favors the healthiness of summer; otherwise, plague makes the weather suspect.
     808. The investigated condition of the air contributes to the prediction of healthy and unhealthy years; for greater future benefit in choosing a place of habitation, at least for a retreat for health's sake, since in fixing the seat of a dwelling we equally consider that the reason of provisions and health be consulted. The experiments which are found in the preceding [sections] will be able to serve this purpose.
     809. But where a place is to be had, to which household gods

--- Page 531 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 487
tes are brought in, a choice is made, not
only is the air's tendency to corruption to be
noted, but humidity and dryness, and the
temperature of heat and cold are to be
observed; of all which there is not one and
the same regard for health. [a] For some
houses more, others less, soften sweet foods
and make cooked foods moldy; in some,
even the timber work sweats so much that it
is covered with moisture. The cause, beyond doubt,
is the humidity of the air in those places. But because
it is better to have these things explored before
you set about building a house, than to learn
afterwards by experience as a teacher, accept the following
experiments.
810. Place wool, a sponge, or bread in the
place you wish to explore, and having made a
comparison with another place, etc., judge
whether it moistens the wool or sponge, etc.,
and increases its weight more than others?
If this happens, thick and humid air is indicated.
811. Because it is certain that in some places,
whether the earth is naturally so formed, or
adjacent woods or mountains provide it, the air
is more, in others less, of an unequal temperature;
since its inequality is adverse to health, it will be
useful to have twin thermometers or thermoscopes,
responding equally to each other in all re-
                                 X 4                 spects.

a] See Century 7. Experiment 777.

--- Page 532 ---
**488 FRANCIS OF BACON**
corresponding [to each other in all respects], to place them at the same hour of one day in various places, feeling no shade, but open on all sides. These thus arranged, let it be noted how far the water fills them, so that upon returning you may compare [the level] with that degree which the water then touches. The discovered inequality will be a most certain sign of warmer air where the water has been lower; where higher, of colder; and the greater the inequality in the ascent and descent of the water, the more unequal is the air's temperature and constitution.

812. Equal utility recommends predictions of intensely cold and long winter, and of hot and dry summer; both so that access to their causes may be given, and that otherwise the well-being of men may be provided for. Concerning the abundance of berries on the hawthorn, on the bramble or scentless dog-rose, and of blackberries on brambles, we have treated in the preceding [a] sections. Wooden work, or stone accustomed to sweating, if towards the approach of winter they have been drier; or if drops from the eaves fall more slowly than usual, they portend sharp frost and a more severe winter. The reason is, because it denotes the future serenity of the air, which winter is accustomed to have conjoined with frost.

813. Generally, a humid and cold
                                                     summer

[a] *See Exper. 737.*

--- Page 533 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX.    489
summer is a harbinger of a harsh winter. The cause
is, because the vapors which summer raises from the earth,
the heat of the Sun does not dissipate, so that they remain,
surviving until the arrival of winter.
   814. A hot and dry summer, and autumn,
especially if a more advanced September is parched by the same
heat and dryness, signifies that winter is near,
which, extending even into the beginning of spring, stiffens
with cold; since the preceding heat and dryness
dominate up to that point, and not enough vapors
rise.
   815. A warmer and not sufficiently severe winter
indicates a hot and dry summer, with vapors
departing into winter rains, which the impending
cold and frost, having restrained them, transfers
to the end of spring and the ensuing summer.
   816. Birds, which according to the season of the year
change their regional abode, having returned earlier
than usual, indicate a sky temperature similar
to the region from which the newcomers are brought;
for example, birds accustomed to a winter sky (namely,
woodcocks, gulls, etc.) if the north sends them
away earlier, are held among us as indicators of a severe
winter. But if this happens under the sky of the same
region, the season of the year is signified by a similar
temperature to that which usually draws them out;
such as swallows, bats,
            X 5            cuckoos.

--- Page 534 ---
490      FRANCIS BACON'S
cuckoos, etc., conspicuous at the beginning of summer.
If they anticipate the time, they offer an omen of
heat for the coming summer.
    817. Prognostics of changing weather that are less
remote from the event are more certain than those
from which the weather of the year is gathered. The sea
murmuring against the shore, the whistling of winds wandering
through the woods, while other things are still from the wind, predict
gusts. For such winds, which the earth especially
exhales, are not perceived unless compressed by water
and wood. Therefore, the same is attributed to the murmuring
emerging from caves.
    818. The highest region of the air perceives
matter heavy with storm and winds before the lowest
part of our air perceives it; and therefore tiny, inconspicuous
stars foretell storms. Several
instances of this kind will be supplied by our
little work concerning the nature of Winds.
    819. Vast mountains are affected sooner than valleys
or plains by the sensation of the air about to produce storms.
Therefore in Wales, when certain hills
are clothed with nightcaps [a], they arouse
suspicion of a bad omen. The reason
is, because storms, which for the most part
a more remote region of the sky generates, are perceived
sooner in the middle (as they call it) region of the air,
as if collected on the borders.
                                        820. In

    a] Have their night caps on.

--- Page 535 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 491
820. A subtle manner in air and fire, by which an emerging
wind is recognized, a manner which
escapes men. By the trembling motion of a candle,
we foretell the wind, otherwise imper-
ceptible to us; the flame wavering sinuously shows
the air to be silently agitated; as also
coals, when they scatter the ashes more quickly. The reason
is, that no wind is at first manifest to the senses,
unless the air is struck and agitated;
but the flame moves more quickly than the air.
As for the ashes, it is not surprising that they are scattered
by an imperceptible wind, since we see that wherever
a gust of wind has gone, grass,
straw, or similar light things are lifted into the air.

821. Wind rising from the deep sea,
as it causes a murmur in the water (about which before),
so also it excites bubbles, or whitish
foam in the form of a crown. The reason: the wind
escapes the senses until, bursting forth from the water,
its quantity makes it perceptible. And by this
very reason it finally penetrates the body, when at
first bursting forth it only pushes out tiny
particles in its egress.

822. Concerning coals which scatter ashes,
concerning grass, straw, which the agitated wind
scatters [a], we have treated [these]; so whatever light
thing is moved, when otherwise the wind is not
perceived.

a] Exper. 820.

--- Page 536 ---
492 OF FRANCIS BACON
[When the wind] is perceived, it denotes an impending wind, as when the air scatters flying feathers, or down, or the pappus of tubes.

As for the prognostics of the sky from living creatures, it should be noted that those which live under the open sky discern future changes of the air more acutely than man, who lives almost always under roofs; and other living creatures are surpassed by birds in that (so to speak) skill of augury, inasmuch as they inhabit the freest and purest air, and can signify what they have discovered with their voices and express it by the movement of their flight.

823. Aquatic birds (such as [*a*] sea-gulls or [*b*] more-hens, &c; coots) running together and hastening in flocks from the sea to the shores, and vice versa, terrestrial birds (such as crows, swallows) seeking water from the land, and striking it with their wings, are harbingers of rain and wind. The cause is the delight which humid and dense air produces for both, so that they eagerly move about, and flap their wings in flying, when otherwise they walk by whatever path is permitted. For it is not wonderful that an aquatic bird rejoices in that air which approaches nearest to water; since many terrestrial birds delight in bathing and humid air.

   a] Sea-gulls.
   b] More-hens, &c;

--- Page 537 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 493
-ted. This is also why many birds preen or comb their feathers, and geese cackle or make noise, and crows, as if imploring rain; with these signs testifying to the pleasure which the softness of the air causes.

824. A heron flying higher than usual, so that it is sometimes seen above the clouds, signifies wind. Kites, on the other hand, carried aloft in high flight, signify clear weather. The reason perhaps is that each bird penetrates the air of that temperature in which it is most delighted. And the heron, being an aquatic bird, rejoices in condensed air; and since it carries heavier wings, it needs thicker air. The kite does not so much seek this (air) as refreshment from it; for since it is a predatory and warm bird, it seeks slightly cooler air, and often struggles against the adverse wind, just as salmon and trout swim against the current. But it is also true, however, that all birds seek deep air, just as swimmers are refreshed in deep waters. Therefore, flying high, they sustain themselves with outstretched wings, so that they scarcely seem to move.

825. Fish frolicking on the surface of the water foretell rain. The reason is that a fish, avoiding dryness, does not approach the air unless it is humid, and continuously avoids dry (air) by swimming deeper.

826, Be-

--- Page 538 ---
494          OF FRANCIS BACON
826. Humid air generally refreshes animals
so much that they feed more abundantly.
Hence a sheep, presaging impending rain, wakes
up very early in the morning to be let into the meadows. Live-
stock, deer, and rabbits feed most fully when rain is imminent.
A heifer also sniffs the air with open nostrils when rain is imminent.
827. The stem of clover swells when rain
is imminent, so that it may rise up straighter; while mois-
ture raises the stems, it depresses the leaves. There is a small
red flower among the stubble of the mown field (which
country folk call VVincopipe) which, if it unfolds itself in the morning,
gives a presage of a clearing day.
828. Impending rain or frost intensifies human
pains from wounds or elsewhere; of these, the one (rain) collects
abundant humors; the other (frost) makes them more acute;
which two extremes generate gout.
829. Worms also, as it were, prelude to coming rain.
For earthworms come out, moles cast up more excavated earth,
and fleas bite more sharply when the sky is bringing forth rain.
830. From solid bodies also you have presages
of rain, such as stones and paneling, when they exude moisture;
and wooden boxes and spindles when they are opened or
turned with difficulty, although the external
                                                               cause

--- Page 539 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 495
cause it may be; when stone and plank work repel air
within themselves: but in the latter, an internal
swelling, as it were, of the body in the wood, is given.

*A Solitary Experiment regarding the Na-*
*ture of Appetite in the Stomach.*

831. Cold and dry things especially are effective
in exciting appetite. The cause is, because cold
is a certain kind of natural deficiency,
requiring aid; dryness is its equal. Hence
all acids (such as vinegar, lemon juice,
oil of vitriol, &c.) provoke hunger.
The disease, to which the name bulimia or canine
appetite is given, is produced by an acid and glassy
phlegm in the orifice of the stomach. Appetite
also becomes more excited by acids, because they contract the nerves
inserted into the orifice of the stomach; a great
impetus to hunger. That onions,
salt, pepper cooked in foods invite appetite,
arises from the tickling of the nerves,
which we mentioned; for motion sharpens. Wormwood,
olives, capers, and other such things
strong in bitterness, excite appetite by cleansing;
so that there are four principal causes of appetite:
cooling of the stomach combined with dryness, contraction,
tickling, and cleansing. There is also hunger from
emptiness, however, too long a fast more often
                                                                (continues)

--- Page 540 ---
496 FRANCIS BACON
however, by too long a fast often removing it. For lack of food forces the stomach to draw in humors, which, being thin and choleric, destroy the appetite.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the sweet smell of the Iris.*

832. The ancients observed that wherever the Iris [rainbow], as if impending or leaning, descends, a sweet odor is exhaled. The cause is the nature of certain bodies, endowed with an inherent sweetness, which the gentle dew of the Iris elicits. Moderate showers produce the same effect, which suffuse the earth with sweetness; but none are as delicate as the dew of the Iris, falling by chance into any place, because sweetness is inherent in the water itself, since the Iris is nothing but agglomerated droplets, which cannot fall unless from a very low atmosphere, which can retain the entire fragrance of herbs and flowers, like distilled water. For rain and other dew, falling from a height, cannot preserve the odor, which exhalation dissipated and lost during ascent. I also wonder if water itself does not possess some rudiment of sweetness. It is true, indeed, that such is not found in marshes, rivers, springs; but good earth, recently tilled, [has] a pleasant and agreeable
vigor.

--- Page 541 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 497
...and attests to the pleasantness, by which also water [can be established to have it]; unless it is too uniform (for uniform objects never move the senses). It is certain that black salt, merely a coagulated species of water, sometimes smells fragrant like violets.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*Fragrance.*

833. Fragrance requires both heat for the matter to be concocted, and moisture for it to be dispersed through exhalations. As for heat, woods and spices are more fragrant in hot regions than in cold ones. As for moisture, it is manifest that things too dry lose their sweetness; and flowers, while budding, bloom more sweetly in the morning than in the evening. For some, fire applied destroys fragrance, such as violets, pellitory, carnation, veronica, and in general all flowers which consist of a cold and delicate spirit. For others, it remains unimpaired in fire and when removed from it, such as rose water, etc. The fragrance of some is scarcely elicited, or at least not so delicately, unless with the aid of fire, such as juniper, and sweet gums, etc., and all odors which lie enclosed in hard bodies. But in general, most pleasant odors are produced by moderate heat, or where a sharper...

--- Page 542 ---
498          FRANCIS BACON
sharpness is blunted, when they rather
entice, than satiate the sense. Hence
the odor emanating from violets and roses exceeds in sweetness
that from spices and gums;
and the distance of the place from which they are carried
makes more strongly fragrant odors agreeable to us, as if
they were gently wafting and not arriving with their full force.

*Solitary Experiment concerning the corporeal*
*substance of odors.*

834. It is beyond controversy that no
odor is carried except by the effluvium of a corporeal substance;
otherwise than it is in light, colors, and
sounds. For we see that the interval to which those other things
progress is not reached by an emitted odor. It is indeed true that
forests and plains thickly planted with lemon trees and rosemary
are perceived by their odor transmitted over great spaces into the sea, perhaps up to
twenty miles; but how little is this
compared to what the sound of a war cannon produces,
though it is moved within a small compass; when forests
and plains often extend vastly. Moreover,
odors adhere to hard bodies, as
when they impregnate sleeves, etc. Hence they are understood to be corporeal
and to subsist for some time,
while light and sounds vanish.

                                                                 Expe-

--- Page 543 ---
<meta>This page continues Century IX of Francis Bacon’s Sylva Sylvarum (A Forest of Forests), following experiment 834 which discussed the physical nature of odors. Here, Bacon transitions to experiment 835, examining the origins of foul smells in animal waste and the biological process of digestion.</meta>

SYLVA SYLVARUM Cent. IX. 499

**A solitary experiment regarding foul and fragrant odors.**

835. The excrement of most animals is foul-smelling, especially to those animals which relieve themselves; for we see that pigeons and horses—man excepted—fare best if their stables and the places where they are fed are kept clean. I state the same regarding birds that live confined in cages; and the cat removes its waste, hiding it from sight. This is especially true in beasts whose nourishment comes from flesh <note>original: "ex carne nutrimentum"; referring to carnivores.</note>. Dogs are almost alone among beasts in delighting in foul odors; which suggests something peculiar in their sense of smell, differing from the smell of other living creatures. The cause of why excrement smells foul is evident: because the body itself rejects it, and even more so do the spirits <note>In Bacon’s physiology, "spirits" are the subtle, active substances that govern life and movement; they instinctively recoil from waste.</note>; nor are we ignorant that the excrement of the first digestion smells the worst, such as the waste of the abdomen; that of the second, less so; and that of the third, even less; for sweat is not of such a malignant nature as the other two; especially in men who abound in heat <note>Early modern medicine believed "heat" drove the body's ability to "concoct" or digest materials efficiently.</note>. Thus, a stench flows from most putrefied things, for they either stink or become moldy. The cause could be that putrefaction produces a consistency contrary to the consistency of a body flourishing in health, since mere...

<summary>Bacon explores why animal waste and putrefaction produce foul odors, linking the intensity of the smell to the stages of digestion and the biological "rejection" of waste by the body's vital spirits.</summary>
<keywords>foul odors, excrement, digestion, vital spirits, putrefaction, animal behavior, carnivores, hygiene</keywords>

--- Page 544 ---
500          FRANCIS BACON
is a mere dissolution of that form. And
another reason is given, drawn from the hidden recesses of nature,
that objects pleasing to the senses have equality
and a kind of order in their texture;
wherever these cease, objects become un-
pleasing. Thus, a mixture of clashing colors
does not soothe the eyes; nor does a confusion
of discordant sounds captivate the ears; the taste
condemns foods of various flavors not properly
tempered; the roughness of a hairy body
offends the touch. Now indeed, there is no doubt
that putrefaction, since it disturbs the order of the prior
form, is mere confusion, and a rude and undigested
mass of parts. Nevertheless, it is strange,
and contrary to the previous observation,
that some putrefactions and excrements are of good
odor, such as musk and civet, and, as some
believe, ambergris; which is believed to be discharged
from the sperm of fish, a pure [substance], but an opinion
beyond the appearance of probability. Musk
(I mean that from foul-smelling animals) is to be
preferred slightly to excrement. The reason
might be that putrefaction does not release the good
spirits that have entered the excrement in a dissipated state;
especially if they are from very warm animals.
But let a more subtle cause be added, namely
that the sense shuns an excess of pleasure,
but yearns for the companionship of something unpleasant. Thus
music tempers clashing sounds into harmony...

--- Page 545 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 501
tempering occurs most pleasingly to the ears; or where dissonances coincide with consonances, they render musical periods far sweeter, and sometimes an absurd taste pleases the palate, such as herring hardened by smoke, the oily food of caviar made from the sturgeon's spine, Parmesan cheese, etc. Perhaps the same may be experienced in odors; of which those previously proposed by us sting with sharpness and stimulate the sense. It is known that from the parts where urine is excreted, generally the odor of violets is perceived; and the eating of nutmeg imbues urine with its own odor.

Idle and vaguely wandering contemplations, and notions about elements and their combinations, about the influences of the heavens, about heat, cold, humidity, dryness, qualities, active, passive, or similar things, have overthrown the true order, processes, properties, and those things which concern the innermost textures of matter and natural bodies. Therefore, those must be removed as mere and ill-defined notions; and defined axioms must be derived from measured instances; and thus, assent should be given to generalizations gradually built up. Concerning such processes of nature and characteristics of matter, we will now append certain instances.
                                        Expe-

--- Page 546 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S
A Solitary Experiment concerning
the causes of putrefaction.

836. Of all putrefaction, especially internal, the causes are spirits, and partly the ambient body, whether air, liquid, or whatever it may be. This last occurs in two ways: either by the ingress of substance from the ambient body into the putrefying body; or by the excitation and solicitation of the putrefying body and its parts from the ambient body. The received opinion, that putrefaction is caused by cold, or by internal and preternatural heat, is not far from nonsense. For cold is most hostile to the putrefaction of inanimate things, although it extinguishes vivification, which always consists in attenuated spirits, which cold freezes and coagulates. As for external heat, it is so far correct if adventitious heat, by excess of proportion, predominates over the natural and inherent heat, and over the spirits of the body, leading to dissolution or manifest alteration. But it arises rather from the emission, suppression, or suffocation of the native spirits; and from the confused order and perverse position of the tangible parts, and other unobserved passages which nature establishes, not from a conflict of heats.

--- Page 547 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 503

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*imperfectly mixed bodies.*

837. Where nature works great changes and alterations of bodies, a body is interposed between what previously existed and what subsequently emerges; which is imperfectly mixed, transitory, and not permanent; such as clouds, smoke, vapors, chyle in the stomach, and living things at the beginning of animation. The intermediate action, by which these imperfect bodies are produced, is aptly called by some ancients "inquinatio" (defilement) or "inconcoctio" (unconcoction), which is like putrefaction; for the confused parts cling together until they settle into this or that form.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*concoction and crudity.*

838. The term "concoction" or "digestion" has been primarily transferred from living beings and their organs to liquids and fruits, etc. Thus we call food, urine, and excrement "concocted"; and we hear of four modes of concoction in the stomach, liver, arteries, and nerves, and in each part of the body, and that all indeed proceed from heat. These notions were produced by the stupidity of an intellect scarcely attentive to a few things; which nevertheless especially in

--- Page 548 ---
504      FRANCIS BACON'S
which are commonly met with in human observations. The most consistent notion of concoction is that by which it signifies the degrees of alteration of one body into another, from crudity to perfect concoction, the goal of the action and of the whole process. A body to be converted and altered, while it strongly resists the one attempting conversion or alteration, its prior form and consistency unimpaired, is throughout that time crude and unconcocted; and the process is called crudity and unconcoction; which it is true is perfected by strong heat, but not by heat alone; for all things which promote the endeavor of concoction and alteration, such as rest, mixture of the concocted body, etc., are means for accomplishing concoction. Concoction has two periods: one, which is assimilation, or absolute conversion or subaction; the other, which is called maturation. The former is most conspicuous in the bodies of living creatures, which perfectly assimilate nourishment to the body; and in plants and metals, which exhibit complete transmutation; the latter, namely maturation, is in liquids and fruits in which ultimate conversion is not required or intended, but only an alteration into that form by which the thing becomes suitable for human use; as in the clarification of drink, and the maturation of fruits, etc.
                                                              But

--- Page 549 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 505
But *it must be noted* that there are two kinds of absolute and perfect conversion; the first is when one body is converted into another body, as previously mentioned; as when nourishment turns into flesh, called assimilation. The second is that which produces a completely new body, not previously existing; as if silver could be changed into gold, or iron into bronze. And this conversion, for the sake of distinction, is called transmutation.

*A solitary experiment concerning alterations which may be called major.*

439. Besides those which tend towards concoction and maturation, there is more than one great alteration of matter and bodies, by which name can thus be designated whatever so alters a body that a return to its former shape is prevented; as when food is boiled, roasted or fried, etc. or where bread and food are baked, or cheese is made from rennet, or butter from milk cream; or charcoal from wood, bricks from earth, and many other things. But if philosophical notions are applied to common things; or if it is said where disagreements of notions do not admit a convenient reconciliation, that the term is lacking, or its nomenclature (as was the custom among the ancients)

--- Page 550 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S
(as it was) placed, are merely refuges of ignorance. For knowledge will always be vague and undigested, if a few obvious notions are mixed together, not drawn from a sufficient number of instances, thoroughly compared with each other.

The consistency of bodies is varied: dense, rare, tangible, pneumatic, volatile, fixed, determinate, indeterminate, hard, soft, adhesive and non-adhesive, congealable, non-congealable, apt to liquefy and not, fragile, tenacious, flexible and inflexible, tactile or ductile in length, intractable, porous, solid, even and smooth, uneven, venous, fibrous, full of grains, integral, and many others. If all these things are ascribed to heat, cold, humidity, dryness, the contemplation will be compendious but useless. But concerning these, consult our Alphabet of Nature, and throughout this forest of natural experiments. Nevertheless, here we will indulge somewhat in a varied scrutiny of them.

_A Solitary Experiment regarding_
_bodies apt to liquefy and the opposite._

840. Liquefaction results from the detention of spirits, which dwell in the body and open it up. Hence bodies most of all with spirits

--- Page 551 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 507
swollen with spirits, or where they are more strictly imprisoned, or again, where they dwell more calmly and undisturbed, are apt to liquefy; since bodies behaving in these three ways do not allow the escape of spirits. An example of both of the former properties is in metals, of the latter in tallow, pitch, sulphur, butter, wax, etc. The inclination not to liquefy is due to the easy emission of spirits, which contracts the coarser parts. Hence bodies devoid of spirit, or which lose their spirit more easily, do not liquefy, such as wood, clay, cut stone, etc. However, many of these bodies, incapable of liquefying, become thoroughly or quickly soft, such as iron on an anvil; and a rod hidden in hot ashes acquires greater flexibility. There are also those which liquefy or are dissolved by fire, such as metals, wax, etc. Others are dissolved in water, such as salt, sugar, etc. The cause in the former is the expansion of spirits from heat; in the latter, the loosening of tangible parts, admitting the liquid. There are also those in which both methods are effective for dissolving, such as gum, etc. And these either swell with abundant spirit, or have tangible parts in need of moisture; the former serves the expanding spirits to receive fire; the latter stimulates the parts to admit moisture.
	Y 2		Expe-

--- Page 552 ---
508      OF FRANCIS BACON

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*fragile and tenacious bodies.*

841. Some bodies are fragile, some tenacious and not fragile; and if you try to break some, they yield at the place where force is applied; others separate in such a way that they fly apart into various pieces. The cause of fragility is an inability to withstand extension; thus stone is more fragile than metals; and earthenware more fragile than raw earth; dry wood, than green. The cause of this inability to extend is a small quantity of spirits, which promote the extension and dilation of bodies, and it is usually conjoined with porosity and dryness in the tangible parts. Conversely, in tenacious bodies, the spirits are more abundant and the pores fewer, and the tangible parts more humid. Hence membrane or leather permits extension, paper does not; likewise, a woolen garment endures it, a linen one scarcely.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*two kinds of pneumatics in bodies.*

842. Solid bodies consist of parts not of a single nature and opposing each other, namely, pneumatic and tangible; and it is well *to be noted*, that the pneumatic substance in which-

--- Page 553 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 509
...some bodies is nothing but the
native spirit of the body, in others
mere air, which has insinuated itself, as in those
which either heat or age has dried out. For
from those, when the native spirit, preparing its
flight, has drawn along its companion moisture, air in the
course of time enters the pores. And these
are therefore more fragile, for that spirit yields more
and allows itself to be extended (especially
so that it may follow the parts) than air. There is also a great
diversity of native spirit, which
is either hot, or cold, active, dull,
etc., whence the virtue and qualities (as they call them)
of bodies (arise). But intermixed air is ineffectual,
and renders things insipid, and, with blunted
stimuli, languid.

Solitary experiment concerning con-
cretion and dissolution of bodies.

843. Concrete bodies are for the most part
dissolved by their contraries, as ice, which
cold produces, heat destroys; salt and sugar,
which fire by boiling compacts, cold
and moisture separate. The reason is, because
those actions are to be called rather a return to
a former form, than alterations; so
that here the contrary becomes an aid. Oil
neither easily does cold freeze, nor does heat
thicken it. The cause of both effects, contrary
                                 Y 3                     than-

--- Page 554 ---
510 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; OF FRANCIS BACON
although contradictory to itself, it seems the
same. Namely, that the spirit of oil exhales
little by either method, with cold repressing
it, and heat (unless it is intense) not
provoking it. Although cold invades the tangible
parts, yet it rather makes the spirit swell than
freeze; just as when a drink is frozen in a cup, the
ice swells rather than contracts, and sometimes
cracks.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; _A solitary experiment concerning_
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; _hard and soft bodies._

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 844. We see that some bodies are hard,
some soft. Hardness is chiefly brought about
by meager spirits, and their unevenness with
the tangible parts. If these two are of several
degrees, they render bodies not only hard, but
also brittle, and less able to bear compression,
such as steel, stone, glass, dry wood, etc.
Softness, on the other hand, is provided by a greater
quantity of spirits (the sole cause of yielding)
and a more even distribution into the tangible
parts, whence they become more ductile and
pliable, as in gold, lead, wax, etc. But _it is to be noted_,
that there are two kinds of soft bodies (in our
understanding), the first of those which easily
yield place to another body, and do not change

--- Page 555 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 511

such a mass rise into a more extended compass. Thus, wax does not increase in capacity from superimposed objects, but only yields; nor should it be conceived that the entire wax is raised by pressure, but only the depressed part yields, while the other maintains its prior position. Secondly, concerning those things which change capacity by yielding, such as water or other liquids, they certainly yield easily to a stone or other body thrown in, but they rise universally; this is a spurious yielding, since it occurs in space, not in the body itself.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*Ductile & Tensile Bodies.*

845. In all ductile and tensile bodies (such as metals, which are ductile into wires; wool and tow, which can be drawn out and extended into warp and threads), there is a strong appetite not to discontinue themselves; by which it happens that they obey the forces of the producer; lest, however, they be discontinued, or abandon their own body. Similar is the nature of viscous substances, namely, that they allow themselves to be drawn into threads, such as pitch, wax, birdlime, toasted cheese. The distinction, however, between fibrous and viscous substances is manifest; since all wool, tow, cotton, silk (especially raw) besides the appetite for continuation,
                                   Y 4

--- Page 556 ---
512          FRANCIS BACON'S
of continuity, as regards the thinness of threads, it requires
moisture, which may join them and incorporate them into other
threads, especially with the help of moderate twisting; as appears in twisting
threads, and the use of conglomeration on spindles. Nor is it evident that a gold or silver thread
is made without twisting.

   *Solitary Experiment concerning*
     *other affections of matter, & charac-*
               *ters of bodies.*

   846. The difference of impressible things and their opposites;
of figurables and unfigurables;
of fusibles and non-fusibles;
of scissibles and vice versa, and other affections of matter, are
common notions, applied to instruments and uses obvious to men. All
those things, however, are only effects depending on causes to be enume-
rated, not to be applied, lest weariness arise from prolixity. The first cause
is the yielding or non-yielding which confines the space of a place to bodies
without loss of external capacity. The second is, a stronger or weaker motion

--- Page 557 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 513
the very nature of pneumatic bodies, whether it be the body's native spirit or common and ordinary air. Sixth, the nature of spirits in bodies, whether they are active and keen, or slow and placid. Seventh, the emission or retention of spirits. Eighth, the dilation or contraction of the same, while they are retained. Ninth, the arrangement of spirits, equal or unequal; and whether they are aggregated or diffused. Tenth, the density and rarity of the tangible parts. Eleventh, the equality or inequality of the same. Twelfth, their crudeness or digestion. Thirteenth, the nature of the matter, sulfurous or mercurial, watery or oily, dry and earthy, moist or liquid; from which the sulfurous and mercurial nature seems fundamental and principal. Fourteenth, the position of the tangible parts, lengthwise or crosswise (as in warp and woven fabric), more external or internal, etc. Fifteenth, whether there is porosity or not, interspersed among the tangible parts; and the size or fineness of the pores. Sixteenth, is the arrangement of the pores. More causes can be given, but these already presented themselves.

--- Page 558 ---
514 FRANCIS BACON'S
   Solitary Experiment concerning
        induration from sympathy.

   847. Take lead and melt it, and
in its middle, where it begins to congeal,
make a small slit or hole, into which
place quicksilver, wrapped in a linen
cloth. It will be fixed, nor will it flow any longer, and it will
become malleable. This is a noble instance of in-
duration from the consent of body with
body, and of the motion of excitation (imitation).
But if you attribute it only to vapor from the lead,
it departs further from probability. Inquire whether
such a fixation occurs, which can be shaped
like other metals. If this is discovered,
works could be made for certain uses, not
suffering too much from fire.

   Solitary Experiment concerning
             salt & sugar.

   848. Sugar has superseded the use of honey; so that
observations and preparations of honey,
used by the ancients, when it was more highly valued,
have become obsolete. It seems that at that time, tree-
honey was as common as that of bees,
a tear or sap of the tree; and
one of the ancients relates that honey from boxwood at Trebizond
drove a man to madness. That
age also knew honey which either from itself or
                                                                  from

--- Page 559 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 515
by art it would be changed into the consistency of sugar; yet in taste inferior to ours. They also had wine from honey to be prepared in this way. Honey having been stirred in a large quantity of water, they filtered the liquid, afterwards they boiled it in a copper vessel, then it was to be poured into earthenware vessels for some space of time, and finally, having been received into wooden vessels, they kept it for many years. Today in Russia and the Northern regions, there is the use of simple mead, which, properly made and aged, offers wholesome and very clear draughts. Wales also uses a mead drink, but compounded with added herbs and spices. Meanwhile, so that the obsolete use of honey may be compensated, it would be useful for a sugar-mead (for so it may be called) to be offered, yet with no honey mixed in, which, having been thoroughly boiled, may be preserved for a long time, as is accustomed to happen with mead. Indeed, although that drink would not possess the virtue of cleansing, opening, and dissolving, which mead has, yet it would be felt to be more pleasing to the stomach, more soothing, and suitable for acute diseases. For it is known that the use of sugar in beer, with and without hops, has been beneficial in such a state of the body.

Y 6                                     Expe-

--- Page 560 ---
516        FRANCIS BACON

   A Solitary Experiment concerning
      purer metal among the baser ones.

   849. The ancients report that steel existed in certain places which, when polished and smoothed, almost equalled the whiteness and brilliance of silver; and that India produced bronze/copper scarcely to be distinguished from gold if you polished it, in its [a] natural use or appearance. But I doubt whether men sufficiently purify the metals which we call base; whether they bestow such labour on iron, copper, and tin that it cannot shine further. For when they have reached that degree that they commonly offer their use, the attempt at further purification ceases.

   A Solitary Experiment concerning
      cements and quarries.

   850. The earth produces certain cements, very soft, which the sun, meeting them with its rays, hardens like marble. The county of Somerset has common quarries where soft stones can be shaped to any thickness, which, when applied to the construction of buildings, harden.

   a] This vvas in the Naturall Vre.

--- Page 561 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 517

A Solitary Experiment concerning the alteration of colors in hairs and feathers.

851. In animals generally, age changes the hairs, so much so that it induces grayness, as is clear in man; although in some sooner, in others later. In horses which are distinguished by dappled [*a*] spots, they become white; and in aged squirrels which bear somewhat gray hairs, and in many others. Some birds also, like cygnets, change ash-colored for white; hawks change black ones for more whitish ones. And birds are found which, when feathers have fallen out, put on another color, like the robin, when feathers are changed, gradually reddens anew; as also the goldfinch, on the head. The cause is, because humidity especially imbues hairs and feathers with color; and dryness produces gray and white (hairs/feathers); feathers also, like hairs, drying out with age. As for feathers, when they have fallen out, new ones grow up similar to those of young birds. Thus the beard, being younger than the hair, for the most part grows gray later. From this foundation must be derived a method of altering the colors of birds, and the retardation of grayness must be devised. But concerning these things, see the fifth experiment. Expe-

*a] that are Dappled.*

--- Page 562 ---
518        FRANCIS BACON'S

*A Solitary Experiment concerning the dif-*
*ference of animals regarding sex.*

852. Sex in some animals is indistinguishable,
unless the genitals make a distinction; as in
stallions and mares, male and female dogs,
likewise in pigeons and in others. But in some,
size constitutes the difference, and that in more
ways than one; for usually the male is larger,
as in humans, pheasants, peacocks, guinea
fowl, and similar animals; in some few, as among
hawks, the female [is larger]. Other things also
distinguish, and feathers, by quantity, crispness,
and colors; as lions are shaggy, moreover with
large manes, lionesses are smooth, like cats.
The hairs of the forehead are more curled in
buffaloes than in cows. Peacocks, pheasants,
and male goldfinches bear feathers of brilliant
color and slender, not the females. In general,
female birds have a more beautiful adornment
of feathers. Some differ in various forms, as
he-goats have horns, fallow deer do not; the
horns of rams are more twisted than in female
sheep. Roosters are both crested and armed
with spurs; hens have either no crest, or a small
one; boars have larger teeth, sows much smaller
ones. In guinea fowl, the wattles become large
and swollen, hens
                                                                [continues on next page]

--- Page 563 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 519
hens have smaller ones. In males generally, the voice is deeper and stronger. Some differ in faculties, as roosters among singing birds, sing best. The principal cause of all these (without doubt) is because males are hotter than females; which you may gather even from this, that males in tender age are similar to females. Thus Eunuchs and castrated animals of any kind approach closer to females. Now heat is generally the efficient cause of growth, if there is sufficient humor (fluid) for it to work upon. But if some animal (this is among rare occurrences) is found, in which there is an excess of heat relative to humor, there the female grows larger than the male; as among hawks and small birds. If heat corresponds to humor in an equal proportion, no difference separates male and female, as in the instances of horses and dogs. Also, the horns of oxen and cows are larger than those of buffalo, due to the abundance of humor, which in the horns of buffalo becomes slender. Furthermore, from heat comes hairiness and curliness, as also the beard in men; it also expels the residue of thinner humor, which remains due to a defect of heat. Hence is sought the cause of that beauty and variety which commends feathers. Again, heat pushes forth many excrescences—

--- Page 564 ---
520      OF FRANCIS BACON
excrescences, and more solid matter, in
the working out of which the failing heat grows
dull. And this is the cause of horns, and
why they are large, and the great combs of roosters
and spurs, wattles
in guinea fowl, and teeth in a boar.
Heat also dilates passages and organs,
whence the depth of voice; it purges the spirits, and makes
it so that male birds surpass females in
song.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
      *the comparative size*
               *of living creatures.*

   853. Fish are found larger than any beast;
and the whale far surpasses the Elephant in size. Beasts in general
are larger than birds. As for fish,
the cause is perhaps because they do not live under the open sky,
nor is their humor provoked, nor does air
or solar rays attenuate it; but they perpetually, as it were,
rest and are carried by the waters,
whereas motion and labor consume. That birds
are surpassed in bulk by beasts, is because these are carried longer
in the womb, and there are nourished
and grow; whereas with birds, once the egg is excluded,
nothing further regarding growth and nourishment
is provided by the mother; for incubation
vivifies, it does not nourish.

                                                     Expe-

--- Page 565 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 521

A Solitary Experiment concerning
the de-ossification of fruits.

854. In part, we have in the preceding sections described a method of producing fruits without pits and stones. To this, we add that more moisture is required, because stones are formed by drier sap; and it appears possible for the tree to produce only flowers, not fruits; as in cherries with double flowers, all the more so in fruits that lack stones. They say that an apple shoot grafted onto a cabbage stalk produces a large apple without a core. It is probable that if the internal pith of the tree is removed, so that the sap ascends only through the bark, the effect will follow. For observation has taught that in a tree with amputated branches, if water entering from above excavates the top, the yield is more abundant. I add what is reported by others as certain, that if the thinner part of a shoot is inserted inverted, it produces fruits with very small or no stones at all.

A Solitary Experiment concerning
improvement.

--- Page 566 ---
522 FRANCIS BACON
will be worth pounds annually, for covering the expenses in soil cultivation, and other things; which indeed are great, but far below the profit. But English tobacco is valued cheaply, since it is of a languid and earthy taste. Indeed, Virginian tobacco, when grown under a warmer sky, cannot, for the same reason, be held in low esteem; so there is hope of immense profit if through repeated experiments a method is devised which here in England would render tobacco more aromatic and more thoroughly ripened. An experiment was made by some by steeping English tobacco in an infusion of Indian tobacco. But these things smack of trifles and impostures, since nothing admits of improvement, insofar as it already stands at the goal of perfection (so to speak); for in improvement one must always return to the principles of things. The method of maturing tobacco must be the same as that applied to other plants, namely, the heat either of the earth or of the Sun. We see some experiment of this thing in melons, muskmelons conf

--- Page 567 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 523
they yield in quality to Italian or Provincial ones. These and similar things must be tried with tobacco. Let the investigation proceed to the maceration of roots in such a liquid as may invigorate them so that they may grow more luxuriantly.

*A singular experiment concerning various heats producing the same effects.*

856. The heat of the Sun for ripening fruits, and the heat of living creatures, is represented, and where each is deficient, it is aided by the heat of fire. Thus the heat of the Sun and of life mutually resemble each other. Trees sheltered by chimneys from outside anticipate maturity; vines, admitted within the windows of a room, anticipate the vintage by a whole month. Heaters inserted into walls provide aid for ripening to citrus fruits. Eggs, as some testify, have been hatched by the heat of a furnace. It is recorded that the ostrich lays its eggs under sand, to be hatched by the heat of the Sun.

*A singular experiment concerning swelling and expansion in boiling.*

857. Barley does not swell very much in boiling; wheat more; rice greatly; so much so that a quarter of a raw pint is increased to a pint when boiled. The cause pro-

--- Page 568 ---
524      FRANCIS BACON'S
undoubtedly, that the more tightly and
compactly a body is, the more desirous it becomes of
relaxation. Barley, therefore, is most
hollow; wheat is more solid than it; rice is the most
solid of all: perhaps also because some bodies
have a kind of viscous quality, and a nature
more fluid or diffusible than others; as we see
in coloring, a small amount of saffron dyes more
than a lot of Brazilwood, or red or
dyeing wine.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
         *the sweetening of fruits.*

   858. Fruit, by rolling and gently
pressing with the hands, becomes sweet, like pears, damson
plums, etc. by rotting, like medlars,
service-berries, wild plums, bramble berries, mulberries/blackberries, or
the fruit of the scentless dog-rose. By lapse of time,
like apples, wild pears, pomegranates,
etc. By a peculiar method of ripening, like by
placing on straw, hay, etc. by fire, like by
toasting, steeping, cooking, etc. The cause
of sweetness from rolling and pressing is
softening, gently induced, as when dried
stockfish, meat, etc. is beaten. It is from
corruption, because the spirits in the fruit from
putrefaction contract heat, and thus digest
the harder parts; since all putrefaction
                                                                 some-

--- Page 569 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 525
some degree of heat. By time
and keeping, because the spirits of the body continually feed upon the tangible parts, and thin them out in various ways of ripening, on account of a certain degree of heat. By fire, because the proper action of heat is to purify and incorporate. And all acidity consists in a certain grossness of the body; and all incorporation renders the mixture of the body more equal in all its parts, which adds pleasantness to the taste.

*A solitary experiment regarding*
*edible meat and the opposite.*

859. Some meat is suitable for eating, other is eaten only in hunger. The reason for meats which eating rejects is, for the most part, excessive bitterness; whence animals that are fierce and choleric are excluded from feasts, such as lions, wolves, squirrels, dogs, foxes, horses, &c. cows, sheep, goats, deer, pigs, rabbits, hares, &c. are known to be placid and timid animals. It is true, however, that certain peoples do not abstain from eating horses, which is a spirited beast; and that Scythians are called hippophagi, and that the Chinese today eat horse meat; and that certain gluttons eat chicken meat in bakery work. Carnivorous and predatory birds for the most part do not food

--- Page 570 ---
526      FRANCIS BACON'S
do not provide good [meat]; but the reason is rather
that their nature is insufficiently choleric, than that they are nourished by
meat. Buzzards, cormorants, kites,
pelicans, ducks, are nourished by meat, and yet
are pleasing at feasts. Add to this, that even predatory birds,
however much they are nourished by meat, are proven pleasing to the palate
when young, such as hawks, crows
stolen from the nest, owls, etc. Human flesh
is unfit to provide food for three reasons.

First, because humanity makes one averse to man.
Second, because no animal dying of its own accord
provides edible meat. The Cannibals themselves
do not eat the flesh of men
whom their own death destroys, but violent [death].

Third, because in general there must be some disparity
between nourishment and the nourished body,
nor ought they to be very closely related
or similar. Yet in great illnesses
and consumptions, we know that man has been fed with woman's milk.

Ficinus foolishly, in my opinion, advises for the prolongation
of life, that from a vein cut in the arm of a young person
of vigorous health, blood be sucked out.

They say that witches eagerly swallow human flesh into their bellies;
which if it be true,
besides their diabolical appetite, it seems to be
from this, that human flesh arouses
weighty and pleasing vapors for moving the imagination,
which sits as the chief moderator
presiding over

--- Page 571 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 527
It yields to the successful attempts of witches, as we have said elsewhere.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the Salamander.*

860. Tradition has carried almost all opinions concerning the Salamander, that it lives in fire, and is able to extinguish it. If we are not deceived by the account, two things are required for the effect to be produced: first, a very compact skin, which the flame, being less hot in the middle, cannot penetrate. For we see that the palm of the hand thickly anointed with egg white, with aqua vitae poured upon it and ignited, can bear the flame for some time. The other is extreme cold, and an extinguishing power in the body of that animal, which suffocates the fire. It has been found that artificial fires [a] are better extinguished by milk than by water poured on, because it penetrates more.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the contrary operation of time in*
*fruits and liquids.*

861. By the lapse of time, fruits (common apples, pears, pomegranates, etc.) are rendered sweeter from being sour; liquids, on the contrary (even those whose expressed juice of fruits

a] wild-fire.

--- Page 572 ---
528        FRANCIS BACON'S
which it yields) from sweeter become acidic; such as unboiled
beer, must, fresh verjuice, etc.) the cause is the gathering of
spirits; which in both cases time attenuates, but there (in fruits),
they are more diffused and under the dominion of coarser parts,
which the spirits merely digest; but here, namely in drinks,
the spirits reign, and with less resistance from the parts,
they grow strong, whence in liquids comes strength and vigor;
so much so that, if the spirits grow hotter, the liquid is rendered
flammable; but if time, by exhaling, has boiled away the more
acrid spirits, it becomes more sour.

   *A Solitary Experiment concerning*
           *Wounds and Contusions.*

   862. It is the opinion of antiquity that plates of metal,
especially of brass, immediately applied to wounds, ward off
swelling. The cause is repulsion without moistening, or the
entry of any substance; for the plate consists only of potential
cold, which does not insinuate itself into the wound; whereas
ointments and plasters penetrate. The certain cause why
swelling arises from wounds and contusions is because spirits,
rushing to aid the suffering part, at the same time attract humors;
it is manifest that this is not caused by the repulsion and return
of humor to that injured part, because gout
                                                              græ

--- Page 573 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX.        529
gout and toothaches produce swelling, where there is absolutely no blow.

_A Solitary Experiment concerning the root called Orris._

    863. The root called Orris has a certain natural distinction, since few roots are fragrant and somewhat sweet, fragrance being perceptible only in wood or leaf. But Orris leaves do not smell fragrant, nor does the flower in any way equal the sweetness of the root; which seems to cherish a tender and delicate heat, vanishing immediately upon exposure to the Sun and air. For by heat it is greatly softened, spreading an odor like a violet.

    _A Solitary Experiment concerning_
        _the compression of liquids._

    864. It is a received opinion from ancient observation that, a vessel having been filled and its contents poured into bottles, the liquid then put back into the vessel does not fill it as before; but that it can admit more, and that this is more noticeable in wine than in water. The cause [is] po-

--- Page 574 ---
530          OF FRANCIS BACON
in bottles, and in small vessels, liquid is particularly
resistant to liquid; and in bottles, a small
quantity of liquid meets the sides of the bottles,
which so compress it that it cannot
expand itself again.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the operation of water on contiguous*
*air.*

865. Water contiguous to air cools it, and
only moistens it when vapors are emitted.
The reason is, because heat and cold have
only transitory powers on each other,
with substance not communicated; not so
humidity, since imbibition is required in
every moistening. But if the lightness and
heaviness of bodies are so varied that they
avoid mixture, imbibition cannot occur. Therefore,
oil unmixed with water floats on it; and
a drop of water quickly runs over straw,
or a smooth body, nor does it moisten.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the nature of air.*

866. Starry nights, and moonless ones, are
colder than cloudy nights. The reason is,
the dryness and thinness of the air, which
is therefore rendered more penetrating and
sharp; so that a great Continent (affects) an Island with
                                             cold

--- Page 575 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 531
...surpasses in cold. But the Moon, although it may excite rudiments of humidity in the air, nevertheless shining brightly indicates the air to be dry. Thus compressed air is warmer than free and open air, perhaps because the true cause of cold is exhalation from the globe of the earth, which open places experience more intensely. Furthermore, the air itself, unless such exhalation disturbs it, is not without a degree of hidden heat, nor without some light. For cats and owls would not be able to see through the night if the air lacked a moderate light, namely, light proportionate to the visual rays of these animals.

Various Experiments concerning Eyes and Sight.

867. The eyes move in the same manner and direction; for when one is moved towards the nose, the other recedes. The cause is a sympathetic movement, which exists strongly in the spirits and spiritual parts. However, experience teaches the contrary; for some act squint-eyed at will; and it is a common tradition, if you place a boy on a table with a burning candle behind him, that both eyes move outwards, as if he strives to see the light, and thus strabismus is induced.
868. We see more accurately with one eye closed than with both open. The cause is, because Z 2 spiri-

--- Page 576 ---
FRANCIS BACON
visual spirits unite more, and thus grow
stronger. For a mirror shows, with one
of the eyes closed, the pupil of the other (open)
to dilate.
    869. With eyes not fixed in one angle,
objects appear double. The reason is, because
if two things are looked at, and one twice, the same effect
is produced. Hence a globule compressed
by two fingers placed crosswise,
appears double.
    870. A person with weak eyesight sees more accurately in dim
light; and for him, vision from nearby is sharper
than for a person without weak eyesight; so that he can both read
and write tiny letters. The reason is, because
visual spirits in those with weak eyesight are thinner
and rarer than in others, so that greater light
disperses them. Hence they also need a contraction
of the eyes, which strengthens the spirits beyond their power
in ordinary eyes; as when vision directed
through the pinholes of a dioptra is strengthened.
The same can be experienced by contracting the
eyelids; which we usually see narrowed
by those with weak eyesight. An old person, however, in
reading moves their eyes away from the paper. The reason,
because visual spirits in an old person, as in those
with weak eyesight, do not unite, unless the object
is removed to a proper distance.
    871. People see more accurately, with their eyes
placed opposite the Sun or a candle,
                                                            and more-

--- Page 577 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 533

and with the hand held somewhat before the eyes. The reason
is, because the Sun or a candle, intruding with full light,
weakens the sight, whereas light diffused around
suffices for perception; also with excessive heat
affecting the eyes, so that a persistent gaze into the Sun
blinds. Moreover, if anyone from
great light moves into a dark place,
or vice versa, a dimness hovering before the eyes, he sees dimly,
and sees worse than if he had paused for a little while
either in the light or in the dark. The reason,
because the visual spirits are suddenly changed,
are disturbed, and are thrown out of order,
and do not perform their function unless recollected;
and since darkness contracts them very much,
they cannot suddenly be expanded. Excess
in both; namely in the dilation and contraction
of the visual spirits, if it is prolonged,
destroys the eyes; which, either fixed on the Sun
or on fire, suffer harm from dilation.
Thus, writing elaborated in miniature for curiosity
in booklets, and frequent
reading of similar letters harms the eyes from
contraction.

      872. It has been observed that from pain the eyes
redden, from shame not the eyes but the ears
and the parts behind them. The reason is, because in
pain the spirits ascend and become more acute;
which is easily apparent in the eyes as they are translucent;
although also into the cheeks and the lower ears
                                 Z 3                             se

--- Page 578 ---
534 FRANCISCI BACONI
...this redness spreads. In shame, however, it is true that the spirits tend upwards, to succor both the eyes and the face, the suffering parts, but then the ascending spirits are repelled from the eyes, as those affected refuse to look around. For no one whom that emotion has cast down from their proper state has a sharp gaze, but a humble and downcast one; the spirits and heat, by that repulsion from the eyes, diverting to the ears and surrounding parts.

    873. Objects of sight can suffuse the spirits with pleasure and recreation, not torment them with pain or offense, unless from memory, as we have said elsewhere. A glittering diamond dazzles the eyes, remarkable colors in Indian feathers, the pleasantness of a garden, a place adorned with precious furniture, elegance of form, and similar things greatly exhilarate the spirits. The reason (which has no place in offense) is that sight is, among the other senses, the most spiritual, which means it is not offended by any sufficiently gross object. But the principal cause is that no active objects are given from which harm may come to the eyes. For harmonious and discordant sounds are both active and denote something positive; likewise fragrance and stench as regards smell; bitter and sweet as regards taste; too hot and too cold in touch; but darkness is truly something priva-

--- Page 579 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 535**
privative, since they distress with no or weak activity, but only very little.

**\*A Solitary Experiment concerning the color of the sea and of any water.\***

874. Motion renders sea water or any other water turbid; rest makes it more transparent. The reason is, because motion does not allow rays of light to pass straight through, whence it becomes darker; while rest transmits the received rays straight through. Moreover, in brightness there is a degree of whiteness, especially if a moderate reflection is present. For a steel mirror shines more brightly than simple glass. This experiment deserves to be extended further, by testing in what way motion impedes sight.

**\*A Solitary Experiment concerning scaly fish.\***

875. Antiquity gave scaly fish a place among insects. The reason for this fact escapes me. For they are distinguished by sex like other fish, nor are they generated from putrefaction, especially those that move. It is certain that oysters, snails, mussels, devoid of motion, are not separated by that distinction. Inquire, at what time and how are they generated? Oyster shells seem to be born where none were before.

--- Page 580 ---
536 FRANCISCI BACONI
were found before; and experience has made it
credible that [a] larger mussels with a thin shell,
which ponds produce, are generated within three
years. Then also that fact should not be passed
over without admiration, that they do not gape
and close, like oysters, but also change their place.

*Experimentum solitarium spectans læ-*
    *vum aut dextrum latus.*
876. The efficacy of sensation does not
vary in the right or left side, but the limbs on
the right are stronger. The cause is perhaps
that the brain, the instrument of sensation,
is equally (distributed) to both sides; but
movement, and the faculties that aid it,
borrow some help from the liver, which has
its seat in the right side, or because the senses
are led to exercises indifferently in either
side from the time of birth. However, we
use the limbs of the right side more; so that
nevertheless we acknowledge some dominion
of custom here. Thus it is established that
some are more left-handed, because they have
used their left (hand) very much.

*Experimentum solitarium spectans*
        *frictionem.*
877. Friction makes parts more fleshy
and full; as is evident in man and horses

a] great-Horſe-Muſle.

--- Page 581 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 537
for combing horses, etc. The cause is, because
more spirits and blood are drawn back to the parts;
nourishment is more strongly drawn out to the exterior;
the relaxation of the pores provides an easier path for spirits,
blood, and nourishment; useless and excrementitious humor,
adhering in the flesh, is digested and dissipated; all
aids to assimilation. Frictions fill and fatten the body more
than exercises; the cause, because friction allows rest to the internal
parts, which exercise often agitates too much. The same is the reason
(as [a] noted before) why rowers are usually fat and fleshy, because the external
limbs are more in motion than the internal parts.

*Solitary Experiment concerning globes which distance shows as flat.*

878. All globes appear flat from a distance.
The cause is, because distance, a secondary object of sight, is not discerned
except by stronger or weaker light. This disturbed disparity induces equality
in all, as generally in objects not distinctly perceived.
Thus letters, removed to such an interval that the distinction vanishes,
appear as a blurred sheet; and all Z 5 sculpt-

a] *See Exper. 733.*

--- Page 582 ---
538        FRANCIS BACON
sculptures and carvings appear flat to those looking from afar.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*shadows.*

879. The shadow is observed to tremble at its extremities. The cause is the continuous motion of atoms in the Sun, even when the wind is not perceptible to the senses. Therefore, that motion at the boundary of light and shadow, from light into shadow, and from shadow into light, makes the shadow appear to tremble, because motion is present in the medium.

*A solitary experiment concerning the un-*
*dulation of the sea, and shallows therein.*

880. Shallows and narrow places break waves more than the depth of the sea, extending in every direction. The cause is that the impulse is the same in both cases; except that where there is more water and space, the water moves more slowly, with less uneven rise and fall, or with less mountainous or steep undulation. But where there is less both of water and space, and the water is more dashed against the bottom, it moves more quickly and into a steep fall, which every breaking of waves generates.

--- Page 583 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 539

A singular experiment concerning the sweet-
ening of salt water.

881. The ancients relate that salt water,
if thoroughly boiled, and when boiled, is cooled,
becomes more suitable for drinking than if it were
raw; although salt, having undergone the distilling
fire, does not rise among the exhaled vapors,
and distilled water is sweet. The reason might be
that part of the salt water rises partly in the
form of foam, partly goes into sediment,
and seeks the bottom; so that it should rather be
called separation than evaporation. But den-
sity prevents it from rising into vapors, just as
bitterness prevents it from rising; for simple waters
of wormwood and similar substances, when they
have been distilled, deposit their bitterness.

A singular experiment concerning
the return of saltiness into wells
dug on the shores.

882. We have said [a] before, that from wells dug
on the shore, sweet water is drawn, filtered
through the sands from the saltiness of the sea. But
other ancients note that in certain places in Africa,
with the passage of time, the water in those wells
becomes salty. The cause is that after a period
of time the sands are imbued with salt by sea
                                 Z 6                    waters.

a] See Exper. 1.

--- Page 584 ---
540        FRANCIS BACON'S
by sea waters, and thus it loses the function of a filter. The remedy will be to continually dig new ones when the old ones become salty; since it is just like changing the filter.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning at-*
*traction by similarity of substance.*

883. Ancient writers attest that salt thrown into salt water dissolves more quickly than in fresh water. The reason perhaps is that the salt of the former water draws to itself that which is thrown in by similarity of substance, whereby it happens that, dispersed into the liquid, it vanishes more quickly. An experiment of great value, if its truth is not doubted; for it indicates a principle which makes infusions both quicker and easier, and at the same time it is an excellent instance concerning attraction by similarity of substance. Try it with sugar thrown into water, first into water imbued with sugar, and then into water not previously mixed with sugar.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*attraction.*

884. Place sugar on wine, with part extending above the wine and part immersed in the wine. You will be surprised that the protruding sugar softens and dissolves more quickly than that covered by wine.
                                          The reason

--- Page 585 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 541
The reason is, because wine enters the part of the sugar immersed in wine by simple infusion or dispersion, but the part standing out is undermined by digging suction; since spongy bodies expel air, and attract contiguous liquid; which sponges demonstrate with the part standing above the water. It would be worthwhile to inquire how infusions can be made more accurate by means of attraction.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*subterranean heat.*

885. Water in wells is warmer in winter than in summer, as is also the air in caves. The reason is, because in parts of the earth not interior, or nearer to the surface, there is a certain degree of heat (as sulfurous veins, etc., show) which winter, being more tightly confined, intensifies, while summer diminishes it, being relaxed by perspiration.

*A solitary experiment concerning*
*flight through the air.*

886. It is related by writers that the Leucadians, out of superstition, threw a man headlong from a high cliff into the sea, having tied many large birds to him at a great distance, and having attached various feathers to his body, spread out to alleviate the fall. Many pro-

-r- -L-

--- Page 586 ---
542          FRANCIS BACON'S
indeed, birds are carried by stronger wings (like kites, and similar ones) by which they can sustain even a great burden in flight. Feathers equally arranged, and not gaping, spread out wide, are capable of bearing no small weight, provided it is placed in equilibrium and not inclined to one side. Let further inquiry be made concerning aids to flight.

   *A solitary experiment concerning*
          *the dyeing of purple.*
   887. Elsewhere (namely in Cephalonia) grows a small shrub, which they call the sacred oak or dwarf oak, whose leaves bear a swelling, like a pustule, from which, when collected, a red powder is extracted, which a little later changes into worms, which (as they report) must be killed with wine as soon as they come to life. That purple powder provides a dye.

   *A solitary experiment concerning*
           *bewitchment.*
   888. Among the Santones, it was widely reported that a man's attempt at coitus with his wife was rendered ineffectual. In Gascony, the same bewitchment is frequent, where it is called "noüer l’egiallette"; it is usually applied on wedding days. Among the Santones, mo-

--- Page 587 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century IX. 543
trons to have such a role, so that they may thus prevent the incantations of others; since they can make their own (powers) useless at will. By laws, attention is paid to them, so that it may not be a trivial matter.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*the ascent of water by means of flame.*

889. An experiment commonly discussed, but the cause is hidden. Take a pot, or rather a glass, so that in it you may observe the movement, and place a lit candle in the bottom of a basin filled with water, and invert the mouth of the pot or glass over the candle, so as to cause the water to rise: those who attribute it to the attraction of heat stray from the truth, since it is clear that the movement is one of connection, which they call 'lest a vacuum be given', which proceeds thus. When the flame of the covered candle begins to be suffocated by the compressed air, it gradually diminishes, and then the water rises moderately, the flame gradually occupying a smaller space, and the rise of water corresponds to the diminution. But at the very instant when the candle is extinguished, a large part of the water suddenly rises, because the body of the flame no longer fills any space; and thus air and water take its place. The same will happen if, instead of water, you place flour or sand in the basin—

--- Page 588 ---
544          OF FRANCIS BACON
you might have placed; which argues that the cause is not the attraction of the liquid as if it were nourishment, as is supposed. For all bodies agree in this, that motion has a place in them; as I have observed a glass held in the hand to have lifted the basin and other things from their place, so strongly did the motion of connection affix the bottom of the basin. For that experiment, when the basin was lifted, oil, not water, was used; nor did the outcome disappoint expectation; when first, namely, the mouth of the glass was placed on the bottom of the basin, the water was moderately lifted, then it paused a little, until the candle was almost extinguished, as we said. That first showed attraction; to which we dedicate more extensive work among attractions from heat.

   *Various Experiments concerning the*
               *Influences of the Moon.*

   Concerning the power and actions of celestial bodies, and whatever other hidden influences they have, besides the two manifest ones, namely heat and light, we will treat them among the experiments that concern celestial bodies. Meanwhile, we will lay down some directions for more experiments on the powers and influences of the Moon, which is the nearest celestial body to us among the planets.
                                                                 In-

--- Page 589 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 545
Influences of the Moon: observation primarily notes four: the provocation of heat, the induction of putrefaction, the increase of humidity, and the excitation of motion in spirits.

890. As to the provocation of heat, we have prescribed before that hot water be taken, a part of which is to be exposed to the Lunar rays, and a part to be kept away from them by means of an interposed umbrella, so that you may explore whether that exposed to the Moon cools more quickly. But because this interposition is of little moment (although in the Sun, shade contributes much to the matter), it would be better to try the same, with the Moon shining and not shining; in hot water in a glass flask as well as in a dish; in cinders or hard residues from mineral coal and glowing iron, etc.

891. One may try putrefaction with meat or fish exposed to Lunar rays, and again exposed to the air, with the Moon not shining; in both cases for an equal space of time, so that it may be recognized what accelerates corruption. Also bring a capon or other fowl placed in the open air to examination, whether it is mortified more quickly and becomes more tender; from dead flies and worms, a little water being poured over them, you will discern the speed of putrefaction; as also from a common apple or a citron

--- Page 590 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S
citron, if you make a hole in its top, it will be evident
that it will rot and become moldy sooner.
Let the same be done with Dutch cheese, with wine
infused into it, to see whether it will generate worms sooner and
larger ones.

     892. As for humidity, the received
opinion is that seeds, hairs, nails, hedges
and herbs, etc., germinate and grow
most quickly if they are planted, cut, and
pruned during the waxing Moon. The brain also
in rabbits, woodcocks, calves,
etc., is most abundant during the full moon.
Then the marrow in bones is more plentiful, and oysters
and snails are more fleshy; these last are
very easy to test, if they are kept in wells.

     893. Take some seeds or roots
(such as onions, etc.); some of them should be planted
immediately after the waning Moon; others
of the same species immediately after the full moon;
but so that in all respects they agree as exactly
as possible, also regarding the soil, care should be taken.
This is most conveniently done
by placing them in pots in a place that neither
rain nor Sun penetrates, lest the variability of the sky
disturb the experiment. Observe then,
at what time the seeds planted during the waning Moon
germinate, to what height they grow,
and how they differ from those planted
during the waning Moon.
                                             894. Ve-

--- Page 591 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 547
894. It is probable that the brain of man
swells more with humors during the full
moon. Hence, for those with a more humid brain and
for vigorous drinkers, it is advisable to take
aloes wood, rosemary, frankincense, etc., around
the time of the full moon. It also seems probable
that the humors in the human body,
emulating the Moon, increase and decrease;
so that a medicinal drink will not be useless
one or two days after the full moon;
because at that time the humors do not
swell so quickly.
895. As for the excitation of movement in
the spirits, *it should be noted*, that hedges, herbs,
hair, etc., grow better, that this happens by the
benefit of the Moon, by exciting the spirits, and that
the increase of humor contributes to this. But concerning
spirits in particular, a great instance is given
in lunatics.
896. Other effects, not commonly
obvious, can also be referred to the influences of the Moon, but
the diligence of observers has not yet proven itself here.
It could happen (but it depends on the outcome)
that with the north wind or the Caurus
blowing during the full moon, cold is intensified;
and the blast of the South wind or the Africus inclines the air
for some time towards heat and rain.
Which *is to be noted*.
897. Nor would I deny that infants and young animals

--- Page 592 ---
548           FRANCIS BACON
born at the time of the full moon are stronger and larger than those born when the Moon is waning. Concerning those conceived during the full moon, I think the same should be established; so that it is a not-to-be-disregarded part of agriculture, if rams and bulls mate a little before the full moon, and eggs also hatch more successfully at the same time of the full moon. There are many things of this kind which could be brought to experiments. Let it be observed whether great thunder and earthquakes are not caused by the full moon.

*A Solitary Experiment concerning*
*Vinegar.*

898. The change of wine into vinegar is a kind of putrefaction; and for preparing vinegar, vessels filled with wine are usually exposed to the Southern Sun; which, by provoking, dissipates the more oily spirits, and leaves the more acidic and austere ones. Burnt wine is also more austere and astringent than unburnt wine. They say that citron drink made from apple juice ripens on voyages under the equator, while wine and beer turn sour. Also, small jars of verjuice should be exposed to the Sun during summer, like vinegar, so that we may learn whether it ripens and sweetens.

                                        Expe-

--- Page 593 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 549

*A solitary experiment concerning animals that hibernate through the whole winter.*

899. There are various animals that sleep through the whole winter: the bear, the hedgehog, the dormouse, the bee, etc., which grow fat in sleep and excrete nothing. The cause of this fatness during sleep could be a defect of assimilation, since whatever is not assimilated is changed into sweat or fat. These animals have been observed for some period of sleep to move absolutely not, but at other times to move indeed, but not from their place; and they seek warm and enclosed retreats for their sleep. It was observed by the Dutch wintering in Nova Zembla that bears fall asleep around mid-November, and then foxes, previously terrified, come out. I find it mentioned by ancient writers that a pregnant bear [a] gives birth to her cubs during her period of sleep; and that a pregnant one is rarely seen.

a] See Exper. 758. & 9.

*A solitary experiment concerning the generation of animals from coitus and putrefaction.*

900. Some animals are fertile by coitus, some are born from putrefaction. And of those which putrefaction animates,

--- Page 594 ---
550 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OF FRANCIS BACON
animates, many afterwards generate from coitus.
To speak of the causes of both kinds of generation,
first it is certain that the cause of all
vivification is a gentle and
proportionate heat, which may exert its operation
on a viscous and ductile sub-
stance. For heat in that substance excites
spirits, which, since it is viscous, accomplishes two things;
first, that the spirits may be retained so that they cannot burst
forth; second, that the gentle
and ductile matter, after it has swollen with the movement of the spirits,
may assume form and limbs. Hence
all sperm and menstrual substance,
all matter which generates through putrefaction,
always has solidity, sluggishness,
and cohesiveness. Therefore, two causes
distinguish generation solely from sperm, and that from putre-
faction. The first is, that animals of determinate and
accurate form (such as coitus produces) cannot
be produced by languid and fortuitous heat,
nor from matter not exactly pre-
pared suitably for its species. The second
is, that a longer time is required for perfecting
complete animals. If that time required for vivifi-
cation is too long,
the spirit exhales before the form is fully
introduced; unless it is enclosed in a place which provides
a continuation of heat, supplies nourish-

--- Page 595 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 554

then by which it may be sustained, and a receptacle
for preventing exhalation. Such places are
the wombs and matrices of females. Hence, for all
things born from putrefaction, a more indeterminate
shape and a shorter measure of time for their perfecting,
nor do they need so accurate a forming receptacle,
although usually some is required. The opinion of the pagans,
by which they assert that in great changes of the World
perfect animals first arose from concretion, as frogs, worms,
flies are produced, is clearly vain.
But if such a thing be admitted, so that from the senses'
deliberations a judgment may be passed, then the pristine chaos
must be recalled, and the rude and undigested
mass of heaven and earth. For the ordered
structure of the world once established does not
permit that, either by any deviation from the laws
once established, or by chance contriving fortuitous concurrences.


*Finis Centuriæ Nonæ Historiæ*
*Naturalis.*


FRAN-

--- Page 596 ---
552

[Decorative band with floral and mask motifs]

OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM
NATURAL
HISTORY
TENTH CENTURY.

*Various experiments concerning the trans-*
*mission & influence of immaterial*
*virtues & the power of imagi-*
*nation.*

[Large decorative initial P]ythagoras's philosophy, maddened by super-
stitions, gave birth to that monster of imagination,
which the school of Plato and others
afterwards nourished; namely, that the world
is one, entire, and perfect animal endowed with life;
so much so that Apollonius of Tyana, a prophet from the Pythagorean
tripod, affirmed that the ebb and
flow of the sea is the respiration of the world, drawing in
water like breath, and expelling it again. They
proceed and build upon this statement: if the world lives,
it has a soul and spirit, which according to their opinion
is, and is called, the spirit of the world. Nor by this word
do they denote God (although the Deity was not unknown to them),
but only the soul, and the essential form of the world.
With this foundation laid, they were free to invent
whatever specious error might suggest. For in animals,
even those of vast bulk (e.g., in a whale)

--- Page 597 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 553**

whale) the sense and affection of any part in the body
is instantly diffused throughout the whole body. Nor
did they wish to imply anything else by that madness of invention,
than that magical operations could overcome any distance of place,
nor be bound by the defect of unprepared matter;
but that (e.g.) Europe could receive the sense of a thing done in China,
and an effect could be produced without and against what matter would allow, with no help
of angels or spirits, but by that unity alone which the
consent of nature produces. There were those for whom not only up to this point
error would deceive, but would drive them wandering further from the straight
path of reason, while they thus assert;
if the spirit in man (whom they call a microcosm),
about to make a suitable impression, flows into the spirit
of the world, the power and efficacy of imagination, and
firm persuasion, can dominate nature. For Paracelsus
and some ignoble authors of magic
attribute to exalted imagination the virtue of miraculous faith.
That vast triviality, compounded of putrid absurdities,
has breathed a lovely madness upon many.
    But we, constantly proceeding through the footsteps of God impressed upon His
works, nor deviating from sense, which is the
lamp of God (and this the breath of man), will soberly and
severely inquire whether nature anywhere allows such
a transmission and influx of immaterial virtue; what the power of imagination (can do),
whether in the body whence it itself arises, or in another. A labor indeed not unlike the
Herculean toils in cleansing the Augean stable, that nature,
of its own right and purged of superstitious magical
observations, may stand; if not to be received with applause,
certainly it will not be entirely condemned. And although
by ranging into this matter occasion will be given everywhere,
yet now it pleases us to open an entrance to other things.

        **A a        Expe-**

--- Page 598 ---
554 FRANCIS BACON.

Various cautionary experiments pertaining
to the transmission of spirits and the power
of imagination.

901. Men should be warned not to discredit
operations arising from the transmission
of spirits and the power of imagination,
because the outcome sometimes fails. For
just as contagion, diffused from body to body,
is often received, yet sometimes the strength
and good constitution of the passive body
repels it before the disease takes hold; so
also, and all the more, an impression from
soul to soul, or from spirit to spirit, often
triumphs victoriously. But it is also possible
for the patient soul and spirit to recollect
itself, and having struggled free from the
bonds of an as-yet-unsolidified dominion,
to overcome it, before the dominating plague
refuses to be dislodged. That power is
especially potent against languid minds and
spirits, such as those of women, the sick,
the superstitious, children, and animals of
tender age.
    *I know not what evil Eye bewitches my tender*
        *Lambs.*
The poet speaks not of sheep but of lambs.
That the reverence for their high station
protects Kings and Lords of lands against
these impressions, could be attributed (besides
the principal reason, namely, the watchfulness
of God, cherishing His vicars in full security)
to imagination

--- Page 599 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 555
tion's impotence, which here leaves destitute the one
imagining [harm]. For it is scarcely possible that witches and sorceresses
gain belief, since they want it to be believed that even these [kings] are
vulnerable to harm.
902. Again, men are to be drawn back from the danger of cre-
dulity, lest they lean too rashly towards this with an inclined
faith, because they often see the outcome respond to operations.
For the cause of success is not rarely to be referred to the powers
of emotion and imagination acting upon the body,
which in a certain secondary way can act on a different body.
For example, if someone carries around a sign of a
planet, or a ring, or a part of an animal,
being certainly persuaded that it will be an aid to him
in advancing romantic affairs, or that he may be preserved
from danger or a wound in battle, or
that he may emerge superior in a contest, etc., he can make his
mind more alert, and spur on his
diligence, or nourish confidence and support
constancy, without which perhaps he would have failed. Now
indeed, who is ignorant of what diligence and a
resolute mind can achieve, especially in
civil affairs? For we see men of a more
tender and weaker spirit recoil from the assaults of another's
audacity, and the state of affairs in
this world fluctuates with a condition so easily changed,
so that often the persistence of pressing an endeavor
even to the point of a miracle
A a 2 successful

--- Page 600 ---
556          OF FRANCIS BACON
may be successful. Therefore, he would err and deceive and be deceived who would ascribe these things to the powers of imagination on the body of another, which it (imagination) exercises on its own (body); since it is doubtless to us that imagination and stronger affections are very powerful on the body of the one imagining, as will be demonstrated in its proper place.
     903. Just as in those operations and their causes error is to be avoided, so also, and especially, care must be taken lest effects deceive us, rashly judging them to be such, which have not yet proceeded so far. Thus prudent judges, as if by a prescribed rule, are unwilling to give rash credence to the confessions of Witches, nor even to the proof of facts against them. For a giddiness of imagination disturbs Witches, so that they think they are doing that which they are not doing; and here credulity deceives the people, so that they attribute the works of nature to enchantment. It is worthy of observation that in ancient times and in an age nearer to our own (concerning, namely, the Thessalian witches of old and the recently reported gatherings of sorceresses, of which very many confessions make mention) the miracles that exist, handed down in writings, such as being lifted into the air, transformation of oneself into another body, etc., are not said to have been performed by incantations or magical ceremonies, but by the body with ointments

--- Page 601 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 557
anointed with ointments. Which could justly arouse the suspicion that these are tricks of the imagination, since it is certain that ointments, wherever applied, block the pores and transmit confined vapors to the head; and as for the particular ingredients from which those ointments are composed, it is probable that they are opiates and soporifics. For we know that the anointing of the forehead, neck, feet, and spine is used for inducing deadly sleeps. If anyone should think that this is better done by potions taken internally, let him receive the answer that the medicines, the ingredients of the ointments, are of such efficacy that if taken internally, they could kill those who use them. Therefore they operate powerfully, but when applied externally.

We will give some kinds of operations arising from the transmission of spirits and imagination, from which no small light will shine upon the following experiments. But all those actions have this peculiar characteristic, that they exert themselves at a distance, not by contact, and are according to the plan of division.

904. The first, which emits the more subtle and more aerial parts of the body, as in odors and infections; and this is, more than the others, especially corporeal. But it is necessary to remember that many emissions of this kind are given, both wholesome and unwholesome, by no
                                 A a 3                         means

--- Page 602 ---
558      FRANCIS BACON
not at all to be detected by smell. When the plague, being transmitted, seizes someone, it is not recognized by smell. Also, habitation and other experiments demonstrate air suitable for health, which smell in no way distinguishes from another. To this head are to be recalled all imbibitions of air, where odor is carried into a material substance. Some of these are admirable, which diffuse most swiftly, such as the alteration of the air in Egypt, almost immediately after the rise of the Nile, about which [a] we have spoken.
   905. The second is the transmission or emission of things which are called spiritual, such as visible species and sounds; in the explanation of these we have been engaged [b]; a proper place will be given for treating them. The motions of these act most swiftly and over a great distance, but with the medium first rightly disposed; and their transmission is easily stopped when refracted by an obstacle.
   906. The third is an emission which causes the attraction of bodies from a distance. Thus, although the first place is assigned to the magnet, it has seemed good to us now to set it aside, to be transcribed to another chapter. But the attraction of amber and jet, and other electrics,

   a] Exper. 743, 767.
   b] Centur. 2. & 3.

--- Page 603 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 559
rum, the attraction to gold, the spirits of quicksilver
at a distance, likewise of heat, and of fire
to naphtha, of certain herbs to
water, even from afar, and other various ones we will
give, not under this heading, but under that of attraction
in general.
907. Fourth, the emission of spirits and immaterial
virtue in those things which operate
from the universal congregation and sympathy
of the world, not from forms or celestial effluvia
(as is vainly both taught and learned), but from
the primitive nature of matter and generative
seeds. Such is (as we suppose) the operation
of the magnet, from its consent with the globe
of the earth. Of this kind is the motion of gravity,
likewise from the consent of dense bodies
with the same globe of the earth; also the disposition
of bodies to rotation, and particularly
from East to West. Thus we conceive
the great ebb and flow of the sea, from the consent
of the universe, as part of the diurnal motion. This is
the prerogative of immaterial virtue, by which it is
preferred to others: that it will not be hindered or
resisted by any diversity of medium, having a passage
everywhere; but it has a determined sphere of activity.
We will deal with these things throughout, as they present
themselves to us to be scattered under various headings.
908. Fifth, the emission of spirits, to this
Aa 4      pre-

--- Page 604 ---
560 OF FRANCIS BACON
matter especially chosen for this topic; namely, the ope-
ration of the spirits of the human mind upon other spi-
rits; which is twofold: of affections, if they are more agi-
tated; and of imagination, if it is strong.
But their closer connection causes them to come under si-
multaneous treatment. For when the malignant eye of envy, or
one inflamed by love, infects the spirits of others,
affection and imagination are conjoined.

909. Sixth, the influx of celestial bo-
dies, besides the two manifest ones, heat
and light. But concerning these, when we speak of celestial
bodies and motions.

910. Seventh, the operations of Sympathy,
which writers of natural Magic reduce to the form
of an art. They are exercised thus: if a virtue or disposition is
to be induced upon a person, you will take an animated body, of emi-
nent virtue and a more perfect degree. Its parts,
to which this virtue is proper, are to be se-
lected, and at the time when it is in action, they are to be appli-
ed to that part in man which is the principal
seat of this virtue. For example, if fortitude
and audacity beyond what is innate are to be excited, carry around a Lion's
heart, tooth, and paw, or a rooster's heart, and
spur, immediately after those animals
have fought, applied to the heart or
wrist. We will pursue these and similar sympathies under this
heading.

911. O-

--- Page 605 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 561
911. The eighth and ultimate is the emission of immaterial virtue, examples of which it would be a matter of scruple to propose (so prodigious does the matter seem to us), had it not obtained the faith and assent of many, and had I not, as if by the severity of the said law, taken on the role of a careful examination, admitting or rejecting nothing whose probability had not been thoroughly investigated. This is the sympathy of individuals (and there is also that of species), that is, such a sympathy as maintains a reciprocal transmission of spirits among themselves in things or their parts, once contiguous, or whole; as between weapons and a wound; whence the most widely proclaimed operation of the weapon-salve; between a piece of lard and warts rubbed with it, or a stick of alder, etc., so that if a part of it is consumed or rots, it exerts its power on the separated part. Now indeed we will pursue instances.

*Various Experiments concerning the emission of spirits in the form of vapor, or exhalation in the form of odor.*

912. The plague often seizes someone without manifest sensation, as has been said [a]. They say that wherever it has broken out, it spreads the smell of mild apples, or (according to the opinion of others—

--- Page 606 ---
562          OF FRANCIS BACON
tia) of May flowers. It is also a received
opinion that odors from flowers that are too
sweet, without the tempering of a contrary quality,
are malignant in time of plague,
as from white lilies, fragrant mullein,
hyacinths.
   913. The plague attacks less those who con-
tinuously associate with those suffering from the plague;
such as those who care for the sick, physicians,
or those who protect themselves with a prophylactic, either
taken internally (such as mithridate, juniper
berries, rue leaves & seeds, etc.) or ex-
ternally (such as Angelica, Zedoary, and similar things
held in the mouth, fumigation with liquid pitch, galbanum);
nor does it hold decrepit people or those of a dry and cold constitution
susceptible. On the contrary, the contagion of the plague passes most quickly
to those who come from pure air, who
indulge in fasting, children, and, if observation does not deceive,
relatives more than strangers.
   914. Most pernicious is the stench of a prison,
which has held captives for a long time closely and squalidly;
by a notable experience among us two or three times,
and not beyond my memory; when
some of the judges who had sat in the prison,
as well as many of those who were involved in the
business or among the spectators, died from the
onset of the disease. Therefore
                                        pruden-

--- Page 607 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 563
altogether wisely, in such a case, for the prison
to be ventilated before the captives were brought
forth.
915. It does not allow those stenches prepared
artificially, especially when they consist of putrefied
human flesh and sweat, to cause harm; inasmuch
as the nostrils continually turn away from and
expel them. But such an air harms, which some
affinity with the human body most deeply insinuates,
and treacherously affects the spirits. It would be a
matter connected with great danger to prepare
compositions of this kind in houses, where there is a
great concourse of people, in temples, public courts,
solemn games, and similar places; since the
intoxication of the air is no less to be feared than
that of water, frequently used by the Turks in war,
and also employed by Manuel Comnenus against
the Christians, when they sought the Holy Land by
passing through his region. And artificial air
contagion is so much more dangerous in assemblies,
as the more abundant breath of the people then
makes it more conducive to receiving infection.
Therefore, it is expedient to purify public places
suspected of this malignity with fumigation before
an assembly.
916. The poisons of odors against individual
people are drawn from scented sleeves
A a 6 & fi-

--- Page 608 ---
564 FRANCISCI BACONI
and similar things; nor does it seem improbable that instant poison is mixed with sweet odors, so that, being received more quickly, it may cause harm. The anointing of doors, cracks, and other things has also stirred up plague, not so much from contact, as because it is customary for a person, if anything moist adheres to the fingers, to bring it to the nose. Those among whom this custom has grown will allow themselves to be warned, so that they may take precautions. Meanwhile, we judge it advisable for our safety, even from the fact that the pestilential apparatus for infecting the air brings with it danger to the lives of those who apply their study to this. But what if they protect themselves with antidotes? No one will be safe.
917. Elsewhere, putrefied swarms of cicadas and locusts have produced a great plague.
918. Mines often belch forth deadly vapors, whether it be suffocation or a poisonous mineral nature. Metallic vapors harm the brain and stupefy those who are occupied in purifying metals and other operations around them. It has been noted that the spirit of quicksilver continuously seeks the skull, teeth, and bones; so much so that goldsmiths, with a particle of gold held in their mouth, collect the attracted spirit of mercury, and the gold was afterwards found to have contracted a whiteness...

--- Page 609 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 465
prehendatur. Lakes and wells, like Avernus,
are said to kill birds flying over them with pestilential exhala-
tions, or men standing there for too long.
919. The vapor of coals from wood
and from fossil coal, when confined, has destroyed many, which is more dangerous
even on this account, that no stench warns of caution,
but it secretly continues a creeping languor,
with no manifest sign of suffocation, into death.
The Dutch, wintering in Nova Zembla, when wood for building a fire was lacking,
kindled a fire from fossil coal which was at hand,
at first with great relief; but which soon,
when they had sat down for a little while, turned to their disad-
vantage. For silence having arisen among them,
and as if a weariness of speech, a certain one,
weaker in spirit, suffered a fainting spell. Others
were at a loss as to what was happening, and having opened the door,
when they had provided entry to the air, they saved their
lives. Undoubtedly the effect of thickened air,
and thus of vapors and spirits. You will experience the same
if you build a fire in a recently plastered place;
an event made famous by the death of Emperor Jovian.
920. See experiment 803. concerning
the contagion of the air from the first rains after a long
drought.
921. Gra-

--- Page 610 ---
566      FRANCISCI BACONI
921. Severe bowel movements sometimes provoked pharmacists merely by the vapor from bruised colocynth.
922. The attempted burning of pepper, which they call Ginni-pepper, perhaps Guinean, provoked continuous sneezing in those standing by; since it is potent with a sharp spirit.
923. A tradition derived from the remotest antiquity is that healthy eyes are infected by another's eye inflammation, and that a mirror is stained by the gaze of a menstruating woman. It is also spread by the words of some, but not alien to a fabulous narrative, that the walking of a menstruating woman through fields or gardens is beneficial to grain or herbs, because it kills worms.
924. Nor is this tradition less ancient: that the Basilisk kills by its gaze; and that the wolf, if it has first seen a man, renders him hoarse by its mere gaze.
925. A suitable fumigation dries and strengthens the brain, stops catarrhs and defluxions; as is evident in the smoke of dried rosemary, aloe wood, and calamus inhaled by mouth and hands. Nor are we unaware that there are other fumigations, moistening and refreshing, of which there is significant use in burning fevers, consumptions, and excessive sleeplessness; such as those from rose water, vinegar,

--- Page 611 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 567
citron, lemon peel, violets, vine leaves sprinkled with a little rose water.
926. In sudden faintness and swoons of the spirit, a handkerchief soaked in rose water, or vinegar applied to the nose, are recommended; so that the spirits, which would otherwise soon dissolve and scatter, may be gathered again.
927. Tobacco strengthens the spirits and removes languor; and it works by opening, but especially by its opiate virtue, which condenses the spirits. It would therefore be expedient to try inhaling the smoke of others from pipes (as is customary with tobacco) as much for drying and strengthening, as for other intentions. I would wish that smoke endowed with drying power be explored, made from rosemary, aloes wood, as previously suggested, which may be used inserted into pipes, etc., and also from nutmeg and Indian leaf.
928. Engaging in the labors of plowing and following the plow-handle serves to refresh the spirits and stimulate hunger. However, if this is done in cultivating land that bears wheat and rye, it is usually detrimental, because the earth, in producing summer vegetables, has consumed all the pleasantness of its vapors. It would therefore be preferable for this to be done while barley is sown in the furrows. But because for cultivating fields, convenient and sta-

--- Page 612 ---
568          FRANCIS BACON'S
& a fixed season is confined within its own limits,
beyond which it cannot be extended; let the fresh vapor
of earth turned by spades be captured, or
let one assist diggers. Noblewomen would do
best for themselves if they would bend their knees
on cushions spread out, and eradicate harmful
weeds. But the opportune time should be seized,
such as mature spring, before it produces plants.
And indeed, a choice should be made of earth
with the sweetest odor. Nor would I deny that this
should also be done where the dew has somewhat
evaporated, lest the vapor be too humid.
I know a very distinguished long-lived man, to whom,
lying in bed in the morning, a pure clod of earth
used to be offered, upon which he would recline
with his head inclined for some time. I would wish
that some Malmsey wine and Greek wine also be poured
onto the earth to be dug up, so that the vapor,
mixed from earth and wine, might more refresh the spirits.
Be careful, however, not to think it is a pagan
sacrifice or a libation religiously offered
to the earth.
     929. Medicine offers aromatic pastilles
or pills filled with aromatic powder for drying
up catarrhs, strengthening the heart,
and inducing sleep. For although they yield in
efficacy to fumigations, yet it is permitted
to carry them in the hands, since fumigations
are applied at intervals. Add to this that
                                                            com-

--- Page 613 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 569
several things are, which by themselves exhale better
than when applied to fire, such as Roman nigella,
melanthium seed, amomum,
etc.
930. There are two things which, taken internally,
cool and condense the spirits,
and I would be an advocate that the same be attempted by external
vapors; one is nitre, to be dis-
solved (in my opinion) in Malmsey
or Greek wine, so that the emanating scent
of the wine may be captured; and if greater efficacy
is desired, it should be poured into a well-
heated pan, as rose water and vinegar usually
are. The other is distilled water from wild
poppy, to be mixed (in my conception)
with an equal amount of rose water; and to be
taken with added cloves in a censer;
something similar should be attempted with distilled
water from saffron flowers.
931. The scent of musk, ambergris, civet,
is believed to excite the stimuli of Venus, by re-
viving and provoking the spirits.
932. Frankincense and smoky odors (such as
are accustomed to be used in sacrifices) are said to intox-
icate the brain and render men de-
vout, by inducing a kind of sadness, and
a depression of the spirits, partly also
by warming them and elevating them. A-
mong the Jews we see, the chief [part] of the Sanctua-
ry

--- Page 614 ---
570 FRANCISCI BACONI
incense of the Sanctuary to have been forbidden for common and vulgar use.
933. Writers on natural magic report certain suffumigations which induce pleasant sleeps; others which (as they say) are prophetic, such as flax seeds, psyllium, etc.
934. It is certain that odors nourish little, especially those of wine; and that a hungry person is affected by perceiving the smell of warm bread. They relate that Democritus, when he was in the throes of death, and had heard a woman complaining that he, as head of the family, would not be present at the solemnities of the feast (which he nevertheless most ardently desired), ordered a small loaf of fresh bread to be brought, and poured a little wine into its opening, and thus became the author of his own preserved life, by inhaling its odor; until the time of the feast had passed. I knew a nobleman who would fast for three, four, even five days, tasting neither food nor drink, but he used to use a large bundle of herbs, whose odor he would enjoy; and he would insert edible herbs of pungent odor, such as onion, garlic, and similar ones.
935. For removing suffocation of the womb, feathers are burned, and other things of very bad odor, whose stench contributes to repressing the ailment.
936. According to medical advice, air sometimes

--- Page 615 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 571
when it is chosen for the sick, into which they are transferred, either when suffering from consumption, or when recovering from long-term illnesses. For the most part, this use is provided by grassy plains, not rough with heath or similar things; and by the shades of trees, as in groves, etc. It is noted that laurel groves exclude pestilential air; from which the healthfulness of the Antiochene air was inferred. There are also lands which grow green with unbidden fragrant herbs, such as those which bear wild thyme or wild thyme and such marjoram, moneywort, chamomile; and where white wild roses smell no differently than musk roses, these are signs of very well-constituted air.
937. It would be advisable to create healthy air indoors. But this cannot be done where places are either low-lying or full of windows and doors; the former compressing and cooling the air; the latter making it uneven; which is most adverse to health. Windows should not be placed too close to an archway (when designed for elegance and display), but should be low. Stone walls are unhealthy; wooden ones contribute more to health; but especially brick ones. For some, the thickness of the walls, with chalk inserted between the bricks, succeeded very well in preventing evaporation.
Expe-

--- Page 616 ---
572          FRANCIS BACON

   A Solitary Experiment concerning
      the emissions of subtle species
               which affect the senses.

   938. Emissions of this kind (as we said before) are to be arranged into separate and proper headings, that is, visible and audible ones each deserve their own treatise. Here it will suffice to bring forward general points and those common to both. First, they appear incorporeal. Second, they operate swiftly. Third, their power is exerted over a great distance. Fourth, they are curious in their variety. Fifth, they accomplish nothing so as to leave a work behind them, but are mere energies. For their operations in mirrors and echo-generating places change nothing in these bodies; but the action is the same as the primary one, though reflected. As for the movement of windows from concussion; or the rarefaction of air from the impact of great sounds; and heat from burning glasses, these are rather such things as accompany audible and visible species, than their effects. Sixth, they are of a tender and weak nature, since they affect only a slender and subtle substance, such as the spirit of living beings.

                                                     Expe-

--- Page 617 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 573

**Various Experiments concerning the emis-**
*sion of immaterial virtue from the souls*
*and spirits of men, whether through*
*affections, or imagination,*
*or other impressions.*

939. Histories record that boys of tender age, taken from their parents and exposed, if they came unknown into the sight of their parents, would suffuse them with a secret joy or some other alteration.

940. An Egyptian Augur once tried to persuade Antony that his genius (which was otherwise magnanimous and dominant) became ignoble and as if degenerate under the eyes of Octavian Caesar, thinking it advisable for him to withdraw himself as much as possible and flee Octavian's sight. This Augur is believed to have been suborned by Cleopatra, so that Antony might live in retirement in Egypt, far from Rome. Whatever the case, the opinion concerning the predominant and imperious spirit of one person over another is old and thoroughly widespread.

941. Melancholic men are thought to transfuse a depraved and similar disposition into the company in which they are present; and conversely, others of a more excited genius for festivity produce a similar affection in others present. Furthermore, others
                                                                      in

--- Page 618 ---
574        FRANCIS BACON'S
in business, some are successful, others unsuccessful. Indeed, rea-
son does not deny that at least slight ef-
fluvia of spirit into spirit are given, which a closer
meeting associates, just as from body into
body.
    942. It has been observed that old men, who fre-
quently mingled in the company of young people, with un-
interrupted conversation, became long-
lived; since their spirits were recreated from such companion-
ship. Such ancient Rhe-
toricians and Sophists were always engaged among young au-
ditors and disciples, like
Gorgias, Pythagoras, Isocrates, etc., who
lived to their hundredth year; and also very many gram-
marians, like Orbi-
lius, etc.
    943. Boldness and confidence in civil af-
fairs are of admirable virtue, so that
one might not unreasonably doubt whether
an hidden constriction and inclination of another's
spirits towards such individuals does not dominate their
urgent boldness, industry, and importunity.
    944. It is certain that spirits grow strong
and are rendered more active from [*a*] affection, and
especially by that which pro-
pels spirits into the eyes. Such are two: love and envy,
which is called the evil eye. As for
love, some Platonists have gone so far as to
                                                               deve-

  *a*] *See Exper. 722.*

--- Page 619 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X.      575
they go so far as to state that the spirit of the lover,
transmitted with the spirits of the beloved, clings by a hidden
bond; which (spirit) fosters the desire of returning to the body
from which it departed; whence follows that appetite for contact
and conjunction in lovers. Moreover, experience has
taught that the gazes which love excites are not fixed, but sudden
scintillations and vibrations of the eyes. Envy
emits malignant and venomous spirits,
which attack the spirit of another by clinging to it. It is also
of great power if one twists the gaze of the eye obliquely. The time,
which renders the strike and impact of the envious eye
stronger and most harmful, is noted to be when he gloriously
triumphs and enjoys pleasures, whom the plague of envy destines
for its darts. The reason is, because then especially the spirit
of the hated person comes forth and spreads outwards to meet the
strike which the eye of the envious person aims.
Whence it has been found that men after great
triumphs have been unwell for some days. The belief in fascination
is ancient for two reasons: on account of the excitation of love, and
sickness from envy; and it usually has its seat in the eyes,
whence it flows forth. If, however, the infection is
from spirit to spirit, there is no doubt that it operates by presence, nor
                                                                only

--- Page 620 ---
576          FRANCIS BACON
only from the eye; although more vehemently from it.
    945. There is also some contagion of shame and pride; the flight of one inclining others also to flight, and shame passing into others, which suffused one out of regard for him.
    Now we undertake to explain the powers of imagination on another's body; in what ways it is strengthened when exalted. I understand imagination to be a representation of individual thought; and it is threefold. The first is connected with faith in a future thing; the second with memory of a past thing; the third is of the present, or as if present, by which I embrace whatever imagination invents and fabricates for the mind's pleasure; as if someone imagines such a man clothed in pontifical ornaments or winged. I exclude and separate from this treatise that (imagination) which arises from faith in the future. The matters to be discussed here, according to the laws of our method (which consists of induction), are involved in the greatest difficulties of argument; since those things which are circulated abound in rumors and fables, and new things can scarcely be done, except most cautiously, because of a reason to be proposed by us later.
    The powers of imagination are of a threefold difference: either they act upon the body of the imaginer itself,

--- Page 621 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 577
they act, by which also the fetus in the maternal womb
is conceived; or they tend towards inanimate bodies,
such as plants, wood, stone, metal, etc., or towards the spirit of man,
or whatever is endowed with life. We undertake to treat
only this last one. The problem therefore is, whether by constantly
believing such a thing will happen (e.g.,
that this or that person will pursue one with love, or will assent
to a petition, or will recover, etc.) the thing to be accomplished
is more happily brought to completion? And here again it must be
distinguished in various ways; for it is not understood (as we have
partly heard before [a]) whether it contributes anything by which
a person is rendered bolder and more industrious (where constant
faith can do very much) but merely a hidden operation,
or constriction, or change of spirit in another. And in this case
it is difficult (as I began to say [b]) to undertake some new
experiment. For I cannot command myself to believe whatever
I wish, and thus no experiment can be made; indeed, it is worse.
For whatever a doubting or fearing person imagines, harms,
if there is any power of imagination: for man often
                                 B b                                 himself

a] Exper. 902. & 910.
b] Exper. 945.

--- Page 622 ---
578          FRANCIS BACON
imagines to himself what he fears, rather than the
contrary. The remedy therefore is, if he tries to
accomplish it with the help of another, in whose mind
he can generate belief, but not by himself; unless it
has been made clear to him by experience that
imagination prevails; for then things proven by
experience excite belief in him; if belief, namely that
such a thing will happen, is joined with the belief
that imagination can accomplish it.
   946. For example. I once told a man
curious about such things, but who was not a little
puffed up by vain knowledge, that I had seen a
conjurer, who from playing cards would show
whichever one was conceived in thought. That man,
learned in his own estimation, replied that I was
mistaken, for (he said) there was no knowledge of the
thought in the other person (that belongs to God
alone), but there was a compulsion of thought in
himself, and a constriction of the imagination, so that
he could think of no other card. Then he put a couple
of questions to me; which I thought was done
cunningly by him, as one to whom the arts of
conjurers were completely known. "Sir," he said,
"do you remember whether he himself indicated the
card designated by another's thought, or rather asked
that someone should signify it to the other?" I replied
(as was true) that he had asked that it be declared
                                                              to the other.

--- Page 623 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 579
declare it to the other. Then he [said], "That's how I understood the matter too, for he himself [the person whose thought was to be influenced] could not spontaneously form such an effective imagination; but when the card was indicated to the other [person], that other person (while promising himself wonders about the conjurer) grasped it with a firm imagination." I stood with ears pricked up, delighted by the festivity of his vanity.

Then he asked, "Do you remember whether he first asked the man to prefigure some card in his thoughts, and afterwards whispered into the ear of another what he had conceived in his mind, or whether he first whispered to the man who was about to show the card that this or that person had conceived such a card, and then asked him to conceive the card?" I replied that the matter was thus, namely, that he first whispered into someone's ear that someone would think of such a card. Here that learned man was greatly pleased with himself; "as you see," he said, "I was right in my opinion: for if the other had first conceived the card, his thought would have been fixed; but the prior imagination of the other constrained his thoughts." Although that carried some weight with me, yet I replied that the matter was of lesser importance, even far below my own opinion. For I said that I held the opinion that the conjurer and two servants had done the thing by arrangement, though led to this by no reason. For to my father
Bb 2

--- Page 624 ---
**FRANCIS BACON'S**

for each owed his service, nor had the magician ever before been in the house: who also ordered a garter to be lifted, asserting that he knew it would be touched by this or that person at such a place, so many inches distant from the longer end, so many from the shorter: and he immediately performed it, first by suggesting to the imaginer, then by asking the actor to think.

Having dispatched this narration—not because it is of such great importance, but because it skillfully places the whole matter before our eyes—I return to what was interrupted: namely, that experiments of imagination should be performed by others, not by oneself.

For there are three ways of strengthening belief: first, experience; second, reason; third, authority: which, above the others, is of the greatest weight, when belief from reason or experience wavers.

947. Belief from authority is twofold: in the art and in the artisan. Things based on belief in the art can be practiced by ourselves; belief in the artisan depends on being demonstrated by another: as if someone has faith in Astrology and finds a prosperous figure; or in natural magic, and that a ring with such a seal, or such a part of an animal worn, is beneficial, he strengthens his imagination. But belief in the artisan is much more active.

--- Page 625 ---
**SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 581**
Be that as it may, all authority ought to originate
from itself, being turned (as has been said) either into
art or into man; where that [authority] is derived
into another, that person must be ignorant, unlearned,
or deluded. Such for the most part are witches
and superstitious people, whose faith is so obstrin-
ged to teachers and traditions that reason or
experience cannot convince them. Hence magic
for the most part employs boys and younger people,
into whose spirits faith or imagination is easily
transferred or imprinted.
   Now indeed there is a threefold way of strengthening
the imagina-tion: authority, from which faith
is derived; reasons by which the imagination may be
excited and con-firmed; and means by which it may
be repeated and renewed.
   948. We have spoken of authority; as for the
reasons strengthening and exciting the imagination,
in magic there are customarily employed (if in the
use of these things there is anything merely natural)
garments, characters, words, seals,
certain parts of plants and animals,
certain hours, gestures and movements, incenses,
odors, chosen company, which intensifies the imagi-
nation, diets and prepara-tions for a certain period
of time. Words are always either barbarous, signi-
fying nothing, lest they disturb the imagination; or
                               Bb 3                               simi-

--- Page 626 ---
582      FRANCISCI BACONI
signifying resemblances, which can foster
the imagination. And these incantations are as
commonly used by pagans as those in
later times. And words from sacred writ-
ings are mixed in; but faith, religious texts,
and things of that kind can strengthen
the imagination; so for the same reason Hebrew
words (which language is held sacred by us)
and more mystical ones are more often employed.
    949. For renewing the imagination
(this being the third method of exalting it), what are
used by Magi are obvious, such as wax
images and similar things gradually melt-
ing, or other things buried in dung, gradually decay-
ing, etc. For as often as those images
are presented to the memory as if present, so
often does the desired effect occur to the
imagination.
    950. If power is to be attributed to the imagination,
it is by no means proper that it should be so separated from every
body and exempt from commerce with matter,
as to overcome a long interval, and
any medium, and penetrate all bodies;
provided however that the distance be not enormous,
the medium not contrary, and the patient body
proportionate. If therefore the nature of things
allows any operation in bodies not
present to itself, that seems to trans-
                                                                    fer

--- Page 627 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 583
to pass from man to man, as is said of rumor.
How a sorceress might create harm for someone far removed, cannot happen by nature, but by acting upon the spirit of the one who consults the sorceress; and by virtue, transfer it into the imagination of another, and so on until it reaches him with whom the designated person has familiarity; and thus finally to the very person against whom the bean was being hammered, as they say. Whatever they prattle about being sufficient, if a clasp is taken, or a part of clothing, or his name, etc., little faith should be placed in such things, as they are closer to fabrication, unless the work of malignant spirits intervenes.

Experiments that solidly prove the power of imagination over other bodies are few or none at all; since examples of fascination do not apply here, because they perhaps do not lack the intervention of demons. Therefore, in this inquiry, we shall be compelled to resort to new experiments; where only directions for them can be prescribed, not any positive results can be brought forward. If anyone thinks that we should have waited until the matter was thoroughly known through trials (as other titles prove we have done everywhere), let him know that we embrace with doubtful faith whatever effects of imagination are circulated, yet our intention is to test them at leisure against the Lydian stone of truth,
                               Bb 4

--- Page 628 ---
584          FRANCIS BACON
touchstone of truth, that is, the light of experiments.
     951. If you attempt anything through the imagination of another, it is necessary that he who is designated for your operation have a preconceived opinion of you, that you can do wonders, or that you are a man of very versatile industry, since a simple affirmation that this or that will be effected can only generate a faint impression in his imagination.
     952. Because you cannot intimately discern the known powers of imagination in one person more than another, it would be worthwhile to use the imagination of many, because thus imagination is found to be stronger; as if a physician indicates to three or four servants of a sick person that their master will completely recover.
     953. The imagination of him at whom you aim your action cannot always be equally constant and strong, so variedly does the human mind fluctuate; and unless success is hastened according to desire, it will collapse weakened and be disarmed. So that wavering may be prevented, various pretexts are to be speciously put forward, so that that person, whose imagination you are using, may persist until the intention is accomplished. For example, if you prescribe to him, for three continuous days while the hope of success is in doubt, that he apply another root, part of a beast, or a ring, etc., as if of greater efficacy.
                                                            Ea

--- Page 629 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 585
If that also fails the wish, another, if that
also, another, until the aid to the attempt is
renewed seven times. Nor is the outcome to be
confined by a space of time, so that the credibility
of the promise may be asserted; as if you tell the
servant of a sick person that health will be restored
to the master, but only after fourteen days have
passed. That will seem to present the appearance of
truth, etc. All these things will ensure that the
imagination does not waver.

954. It is certain that things taken into the body,
frankincense and fumigations received by the nostrils,
and anointings of certain parts, are naturally potent
on the imagination, that is, of him who uses such
things. But it is greatly necessary that it cooperates
with the imagination of the person whom one wishes
to employ; as if you prescribe, before he attempts
the fulfillment of the wish according to the formula,
that he take such a pill, or a spoonful of liquid;
or burn such frankincense, or anoint his temples,
or the soles of his feet with such an ointment or oil;
and for the composition of such a pill, fumigation,
[or] ointment, he should select such ingredients as
render the spirits thicker and more earthy, so that
the imagination may be better fixed.

955. The passive body, and that upon which the
operation is intended (I do not mean of the imaginer),
will more successfully admit the operation in certain
Bb 5

--- Page 630 ---
586          OF FRANCIS BACON
certain times, as we have partly said. As
if you persuade a servant who attends to the needs of the sick
(to whom you have already indicated that the master will recover
his health) that while the master is in a deep
sleep, he should use such and such a root. For
imagination seems to work better on
one sleeping than on one awake; which we will
demonstrate when we discuss dreams.
     956. The art of memory testifies that visible
images take precedence over other concepts; so that if
you do not wish the word 'Philosophy' to escape you,
it will be better done by imagining a man (for
men are the best places) who unfolds Aristotle's
Philosophy, than if you represent to yourself, 'I apply
myself to Philosophy'. This observation is to be
transferred to the argument at hand; for the more vivid
the imagination, the more accurately it will fix and impress.
Therefore, I believe you will be less deceived by it if you
propose the experiment, of which mention was made
before, of fixing and binding the imagination;
if you tell someone that such a person will call one
out of twenty men by name more easily and certainly, than
one out of twenty playing cards. The experiment
of fixing thoughts can be varied,
and tried most exactly; and it should be observed
whether it succeeds almost always, although not always.
                                             957. Ex-

--- Page 631 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 587
957. It is expedient to consider in what things imagination is most powerful. The rule (if I conceive rightly) is, that it exerts its chief power in the most subtle and most easily moved things, and therefore especially in human spirits, and there in such affections as are not laboriously aroused, as in stimulating love, in arousing lust, where imagination dominates; a man struck by fear, or of wavering mind, etc. Let the inquiry be more strictly pursued through all things of this kind. These things could be tried in plants, and that diligently; as if you tell someone that this or that tree will die this year, and you instruct him to inspect at some intermediate time how it thrives. As for inanimate things, it is true that the movements of shuffling playing cards, or the throwing of dice, are very subtle. It is also a very common folly to predict the outcome of games, or fortune less than desired, from certain bystanders. Let it also be tried with a ring hanging by a thread, which is contained within a glass; and you predict to someone that the ring will strike the sides of the glass so many times and no more, or if two people hold a key with their fingers without incantation, and you say to them, he who bears such a name, it will fall from his fingers; for these two movements are very subtle. And although these matters
            Bb 6            iſtis

[In the bottom right margin, there are some faint vertical marks and a small triangular symbol.]

--- Page 632 ---
FRANCIS BACON
And although I completely deny faith to these things, nevertheless I conceive it to be true that strong imagination is more powerful in animate things, or those that were such, than in purely inanimate things; and that light and subtle movements are more effective than vehement and weighty ones.

958. It is a very common belief that a corpse, in the sight of the murderer, will emit blood anew through an inflicted wound. Some assert that the corpse opens its eyes at the presence of the killer; and that such movements have occurred equally in one strangled or drowned, as in one whom a wound had killed. This could be ascribed as a miracle to the just judgment of God, who generally does not allow murders to remain hidden; but if it is referred to a natural force, it must be attributed to imagination.

959. The tying of the male member (a languor induced by artifice) at the time of marriage, by which a man is rendered impotent for coitus, is very frequent (as we have heard) among the Santones and in Gascony. If it does not exceed nature, it has its force from the imagination of the one tying the male member. I would consider it distinct from incantation, because it can be done not only by certain persons (such as enchanters) but by anyone.
                                                                Exper. 888.

--- Page 633 ---
SYLVA SYLVARUM. Century X. 589

Various experiments pertaining to the secret virtue of Sympathy & Antipathy.

960. Many things act upon human spirits by the forces of Sympathy and Antipathy. It is an old and universally accepted opinion that precious stones, accustomed to be worn as ornaments, possess admirable faculties, and that effects of curious vanity are attributed to them. So far, so good, that stones contain subtle spirits, which their splendor proves, so that by consent they can operate on human spirits, by refreshing and cheering them; of which the most attested virtue in this kind are the diamond, the emerald, the Oriental hyacinth,[a] the gold-stone which is also the green Topaz. But that they attribute special properties is groundless, and deserves no credit. It is manifest that light has the primary role above all else in refreshing human spirits, and it is very probable that with varied splendor of light the same effect is produced, and indeed with the added charm of novelty. And this is one of the causes why precious stones comfort. It would therefore be useful to tint lanterns or umbrellas with glass of green, blue, yellow, scarlet color.

a] the Gold-Stone , the Yellow Topaze.

--- Page 634 ---
590          FRANCIS BACON
scarlet, purple, &c. in which candles inserted may dispel the night; or to have round glasses, not entirely colored, but with colors scattered among the crystals, and with handles so they can be carried. A prism also adds strength; as also the Parisian artifice, by which mirrors are made bordered with wide margins of narrow crystal, remarkably painted, adorned with precious stones of every kind of color, which are most pleasing to the eyes, especially at night, and shine. Pictures also made from Indian feathers comfort, and indulge a pleasant sight of themselves. Also clear and pleasant [a] pools most calmly affect the eyes and spirits; and refresh them, especially where the sun's rays, covered by clouds, not entirely [b] obstructed, shine forth; or when the moon shines.
   961. Various kinds of bracelets are suited for strengthening the spirits, and serve primarily three intentions; cooling, strengthening, and opening. For cooling, those made of pearls or common coral are effective; which they note turn pale if the wearer is unwell. Nor do I disagree, since another intemperance of heat may destroy the coral's native color. I recommend bracelets, made of lapis lazuli, or of nitre alone, or mixed with certain cordials.
                                       962. For

a] Pools. b] Glaring.

--- Page 635 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 591

962. For strengthening, choose astringent substances without manifest cold. I would suggest using bracelets made of amber, which is more astringent; and yet is unctuous, without cold; and is said to make wearers plumper. I would also approve of bracelets made of stag's horn, ivory, and those which have a similar power; likewise from citron, aloe wood, first macerated in rose water, then dried.

963. For opening, useful (in my opinion) are bracelets or pieces of the roots of blessed thistle, and also sea peony, orris, aromatic reed, and rue.

964. Spasm is undoubtedly nothing other than a contraction of the nerves, from which it is gathered that it arises from cold and dryness; as after emaciations and prolonged fevers; since cold and dryness contract and wrinkle. Nor is there doubt that if you rub a little above the affected part, the spasm ceases, the nerves, which cold had contracted, being dilated, namely, by the excited heat. For preventing spasm, there are used either rings made of sea-horse teeth worn on the fingers, or bands made of green periwinkle (herb) tied around the calf or thigh, etc., in which places spasm especially threatens. But these things are by no means approved by me, since neither has the power of relaxing

--- Page 636 ---
592          OF FRANCIS BACON
power of relaxing, but rather the opposite. I would think that
those (remedies) operate on the spirits contained in the nerves,
so that they conflict less, not on the corporeal substance of the nerves.
   965. I would like two other kinds of armbands to be tried in practice,
for strengthening the heart and spirits, one from viper lozenges:
for since they help very much when taken internally (especially
in pestilential fevers), it does not seem improper that they should
be beneficial when applied externally, where a greater quantity
can be used. Lozenges also made from snakes, whose dried flesh
is said to possess an opening and cardiac virtue. The other from
garlands made from purple powder, which they call Kermes, which
is the principal ingredient of the cardiac confection alkermes.
Armbands could also be fashioned from ambergris and an aromatic
pastille.
   966. It has long been accepted, and confirmed by various
experiments, that peony root, dried and tied to the neck, is an
amulet against epilepsy, and also against the incubus. The cause
of both diseases, and especially epilepsy, is from the stomach;
which emits thick vapors and fills the ventricles of the brain.
The operation, therefore, is an attenuation reduced to the highest
subtlety, by which that simple (remedy) consists. The

--- Page 637 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. IX. 593
I determine the same to be true in castor, musk, rue seed, and chaste tree, etc.
967. The stone which is called hematite,
when worn, stops blood flowing from the nostrils;
doubtless from its astringency and the cooling
of the spirits. Inquire whether a stone
from a toad's head does not prove itself of equal virtue,
since the toad delights in shade and cold.
968. An experiment taken from a ligature
of horse teeth, and a ligature of [*a*] marine shells
might shed light on how those things, which compose the spirits from conflict
into quiet, may benefit diseases contrary to the desired intention. For in the cure
of spasm, the intention is to relax the nerves,
but a contraction of the spirits, so that they fight
less, is the best remedy. So that childbirth may be facilitated, the intention is to expel the
fetus downwards, but the most praiseworthy cure
is to stop excessive expulsion of the fetus;
for which purpose, they say a toadstone is conducive.
In pestilential fevers, the intention is to expel
the contagion through sweats and evaporations;
but the best intention by which that can
be done is in niter, diascor-dium, and other cold things;
which for a time delay the expulsion, until nature more
                                                               gently

*a*] *Periwinkle.*

--- Page 638 ---
594 OF FRANCIS BACON
accomplishes it. For he elegantly said,
in extinguishing the flame of a pestilential fever,
nature is like a crowd trying to extinguish a house
fire; which is so busy that one impedes another. A
truly excellent axiom and of various uses, that
whatever calms the contention of spirits,
promotes their action.

969. Writers on natural magic re-
commend the slough of a snake to be carried around
for the preservation of health. I doubt whether
it is not a fiction, because the snake is believed to renew
its youth, having shed its skin. One might also take a beak
for the same reason, or a piece of a stag's horn,
because these also renew themselves.

970. And formerly (as the example of Pericles the Athenian
teaches) and now customary, to carry
bladders of quicksilver, or tablets
of arsenic, as an amulet against plague; not, as
others think, for strengthening the spirits;
but, since they are poisons, they draw to themselves
the venom infused into the spirits.

971. See Experiments 95, 96, 97.
concerning various antipathies and sympathies
for medical uses.

972. They say that the entrails or skin of a wolf ap-
plied to the abdomen, cures colic pain.
It is true that the wolf is an animal most
...

--- Page 639 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 595
...most voracious, and digests powerfully; and it might be possible that its parts strengthen the spirits.
973. Scarecrows are erected to drive away birds, lest they plunder fruits and crops. Others report that a whole wolf's head, dried and hung in a dovecote, deters vermin, such as weasels, martens, etc. Perhaps a dog's head would achieve the same, since vermin of that kind are better known among us by dogs than by wolves.
974. The brain removed from certain animals (when the heads are roasted) and taken in wine, they say, is among the aids for strengthening memory; such as the brain of hares, chickens, wild animals, etc. And it seems to be particularly effective in timid animals.
975. Ointments customarily used by witches are said to be made from the fat of children dug up from graves, from the juices of celery, wolfsbane, and quinqu...

--- Page 640 ---
596 FRANCIS BACON'S
to excite itching in a sheep devoured by a wolf,
a stone which a dog, burning with anger, has bitten, if reduced to powder and consumed, will provoke choler.
    977. It has been observed that the diet of a pregnant woman is of conspicuous virtue in the fetus; for example, if the mother frequently eats quinces and coriander seeds (the nature of both of which is to repress vapors from ascending to the head), the fetus is rendered ingenious; on the contrary, if the mother frequently eats onions, beans, or similar nourishment full of vapors; or drinks wine and less effective drink, or frequently fasts, or indulges in meditations (all of which send or draw vapors to the head), it is to be feared that the fetus may be Lunatic or of unstable memory. Tobacco, frequently used by the mother, also seems to have the same effect.
    978. Natural magic dictates that the heart of an ape applied to a human heart strengthens it and increases courage. We do not deny that the ape is a charming and audacious animal. Likewise, the heart of an ape applied to the neck or head is beneficial for ingenuity and effective against Epilepsy. The ape is an ingenious animal and has a dry brain, whence perhaps the attenuation of vapors in the head. But it is also said to provoke dreams. A human heart would help more, if not

--- Page 641 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 597
if its use did not more greatly oppose humanity; except among those who carry around relics of Saints.
979. The flesh of a hedgehog, if prepared and eaten, is said to dry greatly. It is necessary that the juice of the hedgehog be acidic and dry, on account of the various quills with which they are armed; since spiny plants are generally found to be dry, such as the bramble, thorn, bearberry. Hence, the ashes of a hedgehog, applied to fistulas, are said to dry them out very much.
980. The virtue of mummy in stopping blood is very great; which, although it can be referred to the mixture of balms, which are glutinous, nevertheless, there may also be a quality of hidden nature in it, namely that blood attracts human flesh. Experience has proven that moss growing on the skull of an unburied corpse stops blood; also dregs and powder of blood separated from urine and dried.
981. It is from experiment that swallows are rendered white if their eggs are anointed with oil. Perhaps because, with the pores of the shell closed, the fluid which afterwards goes into the feathers becomes more meager, and it might be that the same power should be attributed to the anointing of eggs as to that of the body; concerning which, see Experiment 93.
982. They report that egg white, or blood-

--- Page 642 ---
598        FRANCIS BACON'S
blood mixed with salt water, to collect the saltiness
and render the water sweeter.
Perhaps adhesion accomplishes that, as in the 6th ex-
periment of clarification, or because blood and
egg white (which is the matter of living things)
has a sympathy with salt; since every
living thing has a sympathy with salt; which,
applied even to a wounded finger, heals,
so that salt seems equally to draw blood as
vice versa.
    983. An opinion grew among the ancients that the sea-
hare has an antipathy with the lungs
(if it approaches the body) and erodes
them. The cause of this is thought to be the quality of heat-
ing the breath and spirits; as cantharides
act on the watery parts of the body, such
as in urine and the water of a dropsical person. It is an excellent
rule that whatever acts on certain kinds of matter,
exerts its power most strongly on those parts of the human body
in which that matter abounds.
    984. In general, whatever is dead,
corrupted, or excreted has an antipa-
thy with those same things, while life
exists and health thrives; and with parts
destined for excretion. The corpse of a man
is most contagious and hateful to man;
the corpse of a horse to a horse, etc. Purulent
matter of wounds, ulcers, carbun-
                                        cles,

--- Page 643 ---
```SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X.      599
of pains, of syphilis, of pustules, of scabies, of leprosy,
to sound flesh; and the excrement of any
animal to the one excreting it. But excrements
inflict less harm than corruptions.
   985. Common experience persuades that
dogs recognize him who, armed, proceeds to their destruction;
as when an emissary, with pestilential air, removes
dogs from their midst, although they have
never before seen him, all come forth, bark at him, and attack.
   986. What is circulated concerning the power of imagination, and the secret
instinct of nature, is of such doubtful credibility, that for the most part
it must be chastised in the balance of severe examination,
before it can serve for constructing Conclusions; I would first wish
to inquire whether hidden passages of sympathy exist between
those joined by blood relation and kinship, such as parents, children, brothers,
sisters, nurses, heads of families, wives, etc.

--- Page 644 ---
600      OF FRANCIS BACON
I have mentioned to the English. It is spread by common
report (whether vainly, indeed I know not) that men who
love and are kind to their wives have perceived their wife's
childbirth from some symptom in their own body.
      987. Next after those joined by kinship, a degree of
hidden transmissions and instincts of nature could exist
between friends and enemies. And it also happens that something
becomes known to a third party by revelation, not from enemies to the other party. I recall from reading Philip Commines (a serious
writer) that the Archbishop of Vienne (a prelate altogether
revered) on a certain day, after mass was finished, said to Louis
XI, King of France, "O King, your chief enemy has died,"
at the time when Charles, Duke of Burgundy, was killed in the Battle
of Grandson against the Swiss. It could be attempted whether
anything is permissible here by pact or agreement; as if two friends
bind themselves, that on such a day of any week, though very
far apart in place, one would offer prayers for the other,
or would wear a ring or necklace for the sake of the other,
whether if one breaks from the vow, and rescinds the promise,
the other, though absent, would perceive it.
      988. If power is to be attributed to the imagination and affections
of individuals; it is more probable that it is found to be greater in those joined by ima-

--- Page 645 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 601
gination and affections of the multitude;
as in a victory or defeat occurring in very distant lands, whether it cannot be perceived in the people, whose interest it is, from great joy or sorrow, which often invades many at one moment of time? Pius Quintus, at the very moment when a memorable victory happened to the Christians against the Turks in the naval battle at Echinades, when he was occupied in the consistory with hearing cases, suddenly went out, and said to those sitting nearby, 'the time requires that we give thanks to God for the signal victory granted to us against the Turks;' whose sympathy here, as it were, appears with his own spirits, since that union was due solely to his own work. Perhaps it is also a matter of divine revelation. But what shall we answer then to both Greek and Roman examples? when the people indulging in theaters and games were made certain of victory and defeat a few days before the messenger's arrival.

But in these matters, a general explanation from superstition claims a place for itself; namely, that men recall to mind facts noteworthy by their outcome, and which do not miss the mark, with languid attention to those things which, by deceiving fortune, go astray; and one is committed to memory, the other to oblivion.
                  Cc            quan-

--- Page 646 ---
602 FRANCIS BACON
But as for divination and aberration or failure, we will treat of these in a general treatise on the nature of minds, souls, and spirits.

989. In the preceding (sections), we have laid down certain rules for strengthening the imagination [ *a* ]; a few instances also having been proposed, and direction concerning the powers of imagination in beasts, birds, etc., in plants, (and) in inanimate bodies. And in all these (things), it is to be observed that experiments should be made through light and subtle movements, not the contrary. For by means of imagination, you may more easily restrain a bird from singing than from eating and flying. I then make the selection of experiments arbitrary for anyone, so that he may bring into the hazard of trial those which seem most convenient to him. Now we will give only a few examples of each of these three kinds.

990. Employ someone with imagination (the prescribed rule having been observed) so that you may restrain a bird from singing, (or) a dog from barking. Try the imagination of certain people whom you strengthen with suitable (things) for use...

--- Page 647 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 603
when you hunt wild beasts or hares; in hunting dogs, in the running of horses, and similar relative movements. For by means of imagination you will more easily have accelerated or slowed down a movement, than you will have aroused or stopped it; just as it is an easier task for a dog's run to slow down, than for it to stop at once and altogether, as if with a bound movement.
991. In plants, too, one may try the power of imagination, as regards slighter movements, such as sudden wilting, or their vigorous growth, or an inclination this way or that, or constriction and unfolding, etc.
992. The powers of imagination as regards inanimate things will be shown by the inhibited fermentation of beer, with dregs mixed into it; or the preparation of butter or cheese, with milk agitated and rennet added.
993. It is an ancient tradition, adduced by all as an example of hidden properties and influences, concerning the marine torpedo, which binds the hand of the toucher with numbness, even if a long stick is interposed. It is a kind of operation at a distance, if the medium is suitably continued; thus, when the string of a bow is plucked, the sound will strike the ear, if you apply a horn to it.
994. Among the writers of natural magic, Cc 2 decan-

--- Page 648 ---
604 FRANCISCI BACONI
the most celebrated virtue is that of parts from living creatures, provided their life is separated without blemish; as if a living animal would infuse into the separated parts the vigor of an immaterial virtue. So far, the truth holds, that a part of an animal recently slaughtered is more potent than from a similar animal that died spontaneously; because it abounds more in spirits.

995. It is permissible also to apply the experiment to parts from individual plants and animals; for instance, if you allow a cut part of a slip to putrefy, to see if the rest of the slip withers; or a part cut from the tail or leg of a dog or cat, whether its putrefaction hinders the healing of the remaining part.

996. They say that a ring or bracelet worn, made from the hair of a beloved, helps to feed love. Perhaps because it excites the imagination; a glove, or any other thing destined to attest favor, would possess the same power.

997. The sympathy of individuals, which were once whole, or from contact, exceeds belief above all. Therefore, it is pleasing to engage in a more thorough examination of it, according to the principle of our method. It is a commonplace that warts are removed if you allow to rot that which you have rubbed on them. My belief here wavers less, because it is wrong to contradict one's own experience, when I was quite a boy...

--- Page 649 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 605
while I had a wart on my finger, around my sixteenth year of age when I was living in Paris, gradually more began to grow on both hands, at least a hundred, within the space of a month. The wife of an English orator, a woman by no means superstitious, said one day that she wished to remove whatever warts disfigured her hands. Afterwards she took a small piece of bacon, with the skin not removed, with the fat of which she anointed all the warts; and among them that one which had almost been coeval with me up to that time. Then, having affixed the piece of bacon with a nail to the post of her bedroom window, which faced south, she exposed it to the sun to be putrefied. The result was that all the warts completely vanished within seven months; even that one which surpassed the others in age. I do not wonder that those born in a short time died quickly; but the destruction of that one, which had remained clinging to my hand for so many years, still occupies my mind. The same effect is attributed to Elder, if you apply a green stick from it for rubbing warts, which afterwards, placed in dung, should rot. It could be tried on corns of the feet and scrofulous tumors and similar excrescences; also on parts of animals which are most akin to excrescences, such as the combs and spurs of cocks,
Cc 3 bestia-

--- Page 650 ---
606      OF FRANCIS BACON
of beasts' horns, etc. The method of experimentation should be twofold: either the parts are rubbed with lard or elder, as in the aforesaid; or those parts, cut into smaller pieces, you may have what is left to decay, and observe what the decay of a separated particle avails for one that was once joined.

   998. A widespread opinion has prevailed among many, that by anointing the weapon and whatever inflicted the wound, the wound is healed. From the account of a most trustworthy man (although hitherto I cannot be induced to believe the experiments) you will note the following. First, the weapon-salve consists of various ingredients, among which the most remarkable and difficult to obtain are moss from the skull of an unburied corpse, bear's grease, and a she-bear killed in parturition. In the latter two, I readily suspect that a loophole has been sought, so that, if the cure did not succeed, it could be pretended that the beasts had not been killed at the proper time. Ireland supplies a great quantity of moss from bodies killed, heaped up, and unburied. The remaining ingredients are, hematite reduced to powder, and certain other things that stop blood; which moss also does. A description of the entire salve exists in Crollius's Chymical Dispensatory. Secondly, that salve (is applied) not to the wound
                                          but

--- Page 651 ---
SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X. 607
but applied to the weapons themselves, it exerts its power.
Thirdly (which I much approve of), for the preparation of the salve, they do not require a certain constellation; a usual refuge for ignorance in magical medicines; [whereby] if they fail, [they claim] it was not prepared under that sign which is destined in the heavens for its preparation. Fourthly, it can be applied to the weapons, even if the patient is far removed at long intervals. Fifthly, it does not seem necessary that the imagination of healing should concur; since the injured person can be cured even without any knowledge of what is intended. And so far, experience testifies that if the salve, for example, was wiped off the weapons while the wounded person was unaware, the pains flared up again, until the weapons were again anointed. Sixthly, they assert that if the weapon itself is not available, it is sufficient if an iron or wooden instrument, not dissimilar in form, is inserted into the wound so that it draws blood; the anointing of which is equally momentous for the cure. That, I believe, is an invention, so that this wonderful method of healing may be more sought after and used; since weapons are often lacking. Seventhly, the wound must first be cleansed with white wine or the urine of the injured person, then tightly bound with a thin linen cloth, which must not be removed before the healing process is completed. Eighthly, the sword must be properly covered with a sheath, lest the anointed part be exposed to the wind.

--- Page 652 ---
608          FRANCIS BACON'S
be placed. Ninth, that the salve, wiped from the sword
and preserved, can double its service; its
virtue increased rather than diminished.
Tenth, that it heals much faster than other
wound salves. Lastly, that the cure in man
and beast will be with equal success;
which pleases me above all, since the whole matter
can be more easily investigated.

   *A solitary experiment concerning*
          *hidden properties.*

   999. I would like men to know that, although
I reprehend the supine negligence in seeking
the causes of things; while these are attributed
to hidden faculties and properties (a hindrance
and a deadly slumber to the instituted
investigation for further knowledge) I do not
nevertheless establish that much should not be left
to proof by experiments
in the practical part of knowledge, where judgment
does not penetrate so exactly; and this not
only in species, but in individual cases. Thus in
Medicine, if you wish to cure the king's evil,
it is not enough to say that the medicine should not be
cooling, since it impedes deobstruction,
which the disease requires; nor should it be hot,
since it exasperates bile, so that it penetrates to the
gallbladder, for in it the obstruction
adheres, the cause of the disease, etc. But from experien-
                                                              ce

--- Page 653 ---
      SYLV. SYLVAR. Cent. X.      609
-rience is to be accepted, that powder of ground-pine or similar taken in beer cures the royal disease. Again, a prudent physician will not continuously apply the same medicine, but will vary it, if the first medicine disappoints the hope of success. For remedies for the royal disease, stones, fevers, etc., which are beneficial in one place, harmful in another; according to the suitability that intervenes between the medicine and the individual body.

   *A solitary experiment concerning*
      *the general sympathy of the human*
               *spirit.*

   1000. The pleasure which popularity, fame, honor, submission, and subjection of minds, wills, and affections generate in men (although another end may be proposed for seeking these things) seems a thing pleasing and suitable to human nature, nor does it admit further contemplation of a more widely extending consequence. But truly to one paying attention, a deeper meaning occurs, as if all human spirits and minds had proceeded from one divine source. Otherwise indeed, how would man be so greatly affected by those things which others bring forth conceived in mind? The best temperament and constitution of mind seeks solidly good fame and
               Cc 5               true-

--- Page 654 ---
610        FR. BACON'S SYLV. &c.
true honor; a lesser one seeks popular favor,
and enjoys the title and applause of a people-pleaser.
A worse one seeks subjection and
plots tyranny, as is evident in conquerors
most abundantly filled with affected glory, and
the world's agitators. Yet this is revealed more
clearly in Arch-heretics, since the introduction
of novelty in the doctrine of salvation, is a kind
of tyrannical domination over the intellect
and human faith.

*End of the Tenth and Last Century*
*of Natural History.*

[A decorative woodcut ornament featuring fruits and foliage]

Exco-

--- Page 655 ---
611

A remedy for Gout devised for the Baron,
to which Experiment 60 pertains,
consists of the following.

I. Prescription for a Poultice.

Take about three ounces of fine flour bread,
only the crumb, finely shredded; let it be
cooked in milk until it thickens into a small
poultice. Add at the end a drachm and a half
of red rose powder. Ten grains of saffron.
An ounce of rose oil. Let it be spread on a
linen cloth, and applied warm, and continued
for three hours.

II. Bath or Fomentation.

℞. Half a handful of sage leaves. Six
drachms of cut hemlock root. Half an ounce
of bryony roots. Two handfuls of red rose
leaves. Let them be cooked in a pot filled
with water in which steel has been quenched,
until the liquid has been reduced to a
quarter. After per-

--- Page 656 ---
612
after straining, add half a handful
of black salt; let it be applied with a scarlet
cloth or scarlet wool dipped
in the warm liquid, the application repeated seven
times. Let these things be done in the space of a quarter
of an hour or a little more.

III. Plaster.
Recipe. Plaster of Diacalciteos,
as much as is sufficient for the part to be covered. Let it be dis-
solved in rose oil to such a con-
sistency that it adheres; let it be spread on a thin linen
cloth and applied.

I N-

--- Page 657 ---
[Decorative woodcut headpiece with a central mask and symmetrical floral scrolls]

INDEX OF CONTENTS
IN
THE NATURAL HISTORY
OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM.

**A.**

[Large decorative initial A] Fir tree gives pitch. 342
Fir and pine, how when broken they shine. 375
Fir tree deeply rooted. 376
What kind of sharpness wormwood has. 35
Why longer abstinence from Venus harms moist bodies. 403
Acacias do not become sweet. 371
Maple mixed with pig dung nourishes trees well. 278
Preparation of fragrant vinegar. 11
What kind of herb sorrel is. 387

Why vinegar is applied to the nostrils of one who has fainted. 567
Diamonds and carbuncles are exudations. 4
Effects of wonder. 425
Air and vapor, in how many ways it is changed into water. 18. Whether it can thicken so as to nourish. 23. Attenuated beyond nature, it prepares a place for itself. 24. Clear air is a preparative for purgation. 53. In sounds it is not varied in as many ways as in voices. 85. Struck and compressed, it emits sound. 94, 95. Broken, a cause of sound. 99. Rarefied by acclamation. 103. Clear air relaxes the spirits.
Dd tus.

--- Page 658 ---
I N D E X

**[Left Column]**
spirit. 193. disposed to putrefaction, how it is recognized. 485.
compressed, why it heats more than when free. 531.
is not without some light. ibid.
Of air and flame, if they are incorporated, how great their power. 25
Qualities of air little alter sounds. 149. Its condensation, how it is explored by a bladder. 224
Rains of Egypt, why rare. 455, 456
Equal things delight. 89
Bronze/Copper hardly to be distinguished from gold, if it were polished. 516
Excessive heat harms grain. 385
Aether has an affinity with stars. 219
Affections of beasts, how they impart power to inanimate things. 595
Africa always produces something monstrous, whence. 282
Africans abstain from public (gatherings) after rains. 484
Agaric, what it is, and its medicinal power. 323, 367

**[Right Column]**
Whiteness, whence. 73
Egg white removes falseness/adulteration, and why. 598
Common alchemists trifle, and yet have some good things. 198
Alexander the Great smelled sweetly. 6
The corpse of Alexander the Great seen intact by Caesar Augustus. 460
Seaweed, what it provides for plants. 269
Dryness of food contributes to slenderness of stature. 217
Major alteration, what it is. 505
Bitter things ward off putrefaction. 405
Amber, what it is, and whence. 500
Effects of love among the Platonists. 575
Pruning of hedges contributes to longevity. 46
Bitter almonds, how they become sweet. 276
Snakes, why they live long. 408
Snakes with venomous teeth. 446
Eels, why they live long. 408
Snake skins worn are believed to be beneficial for health.

--- Page 659 ---
R E R V M.
OF THINGS.

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 660 ---
**I N D E X**

| Column 1 | Column 2 |
| :--- | :--- |
| Drippings, whence. 16. Change in | longer-lived than garden (trees). |
| artificial ice. 19. Metallic (drops), | 337. Not many are deprived of |
| which harden. 66. Fall of hot (water), | flower & fruit. 343. Some (trees), |
| why less sonorous than cold. | why they bear fruit only once in two |
| 116. Conversion into oil. | years. 366. Some (trees), why they are |
| 219. & 20. Quality, | fertile in old age. 368. Some (trees), |
| how to be tested. | why they strike roots deeply or |
| 241, 483. With a plant, | less so. 375. & 376 |
| what sympathy. 293. | A tree stripped of its bark dies. 377. |
| Timely exclusion & | Dead (tree), how it may revive. 265. |
| admission benefits the earth. | Where the timber tree grows better. |
| 348. Use of hot (water) | 279. In Persia nourished with |
| in mortification from | salt water. 358 |
| cold. 471. Ascent | Aids for trees, what. |
| through flame & its | 383, 384. Pruning contributes |
| cause. 543 | to durability. 337. Fallen |
| Aquatic spider. 406 | trunks sprout for a time. 22 |
| Trees which are to be planted on embankments, | Archbishop of Vienna, how he |
| & why. 263. How to be trans- | predicted to the King of France the |
| planted. 279. Where they are to be | death of the Duke of Burgundy. |
| planted more deeply or not. ibid. Contiguous | 600 |
| (trees), how they are united. | Turkish bows, how vehement their |
| 284. How they bear | shot. 415 |
| flowers. 300. Hot (trees) | Sand on Mount Carmel turns |
| grow up to a certain height, not | minerals into glass. 465 |
| impeded. 315. Art of making | Silver mixed with gold, how it is |
| them dwarf. 316. Dead (trees), | separated. 478 |
| not entirely barren. | Clay, cheese, of stone, hard- |
| 322. Wild (trees), why | |

--- Page 661 ---
R E R V M.

[Left Column]
hardness. 69
Bracelets, of what kind they strengthen the spirits. 590, 591
Aristotle gives an absurd cause for the color in the hairs of beasts and feathers of birds. 4
The trachea as the cause of musical sound by its evenness. 122
The articulation of sound requires moderation. 132
The reed plant, what kind. 377. Its use in stopping up the cracks of ships. ibid. Whence the smoothness in its bark. 378
The gaze in love, what kind. 575
Why the bite of an asp kills gently. 371
When the assimilation of food especially occurs. 48
What habituation to a thing harmful in itself accomplishes. 50
How audible things communicate themselves. 166
Aid to hearing. 174
The making of gold possible. 198. A method of making it devised for a certain German. 200
The south wind makes men sluggish. 236. To flowers

--- Page 662 ---
I N D E X

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 663 ---
R E R V M.

| Column 1 | Column 2 |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 664 ---
I N D E X

**[Left Column]**

The brain of living beings does not
  nourish.                                38
Steel which equals the brightness
  of silver.                              516
Germander cures the royal disease
  (jaundice).                             399
How wavy paper is made.                   440
Playing card, which someone has
  thought of, its meaning communi-
  cated by another.                       578
Medicinal sap of celandine.               369
The Chinese prepare silver. 199.
  They paint themselves.                  438
Cholera removes appetite.                 185
What chemists have accomplished.           77
Immoderate foods often purge.              31
How foods become medicine.                295
Food for the elderly & for those
  whose teeth are weak.                    42
Where and when the glow-worm is
  generated.                              420
Glow-worm placed in glass vessels
  under water for deceiving fish.         451
Why hemlock in a drink kills
  slowly.                                 371
Ashes fertilize.                          346

**[Right Column]**

What the scattering of ashes over
  the ground accomplishes.                383.
Citrus ripens when beer sours.            548
What the clarification of liquid is
  & how it is done.                         5
Clarification with almonds to be
  used for a drink.                       457
Most precise clarification.               189
The reason for clarification.             187
Why harpsichords, when closed at
  the top, produce a weaker sound.        111
Keys in Monasteries are covered
  with cloth.                             116
Cemeteries consume the body more
  quickly than pure earth.                204
Relationship between inarticulate
  sounds & certain letters of articu-
  late speech.                            134
The origin of liquefaction.               203
By what heat liquefaction occurs.         417
Colors pass through the air without
  its movement.                           101
Colors do not gradually diminish
  like sounds, & why.                     140
The cause of color in the hairs of
  beasts & the feathers of birds.

--- Page 665 ---
**OF THINGS.**

**[Left Column]**
feathers. 4
Color in Ethiopians, whence. 245
Dissected doves, what remedy they provide. 75
Commiseration, what it is. 425
Composition of plants. 282
The force of compression in solid bodies. 6
Compression of parts in tender birth changes the form. 21
Compression, the root of mechanical operations. 6
Compression, the cause of violent motion. ibid.
Puncturing of fruit, what it provides. 209
The word 'concoction', whence and whither derived. 503
Concoction, properly what it is, of how many kinds, how it happens. 504
Concrete bodies, why they are dissolved by their contraries. 509
Concussion of the head, whence in injury. 424
Shaking of a tree, when it harms or benefits. 261

**[Right Column]**
Condensation of air through a bladder in snow. 61
Sympathy of the head, feet, and stomach. 75
Conspiracy detected by means of a burning mirror. 98
Constantinople is deprived of beer. 417
Grinding of teeth in mourning, whence. 422
There is a double conversion of bodies. 505
Description of the bindweed. 431
Corals, what they are, and where they grow. 466
Sympathy of the heart and hands. 75
Stag's horn cures fevers. 399
Solid bodies do not impede vision if they are transparent. 167
A body to be placed in water requires density. 255
A soft body extinguishes sounds more than a hard one. 115
Corruption, how it may be prevented. 459
A monkey's heart applied to a human heart, what it provides. 596
Quince and coriander seed, what they effect. 596

Dd 5 Cri-

--- Page 666 ---
I N D E X

[Left Column]

Sifting of earth, its effect. 266
Curling in leaves, its origin. 375
Degrees of curling. ibid.
Room in Trinity College,
Cambridge, echoing. 113
Cucumbers attract applied
water. 275. How they become less watery.
ibid.
Cucumber seed soaked in
milk. 274
Exact cultivation sometimes
harmful. 50
Weevil, its origin. 405
Speed of a current, how
and why it is increased. 410
Cypress, warm. 376

D.

Condemned to the galleys,
why in good bodily condition. 435
Nourishment of the weak. 40
Certain decoctions, why they
swell. 523, 524
Branch of a decorticated tree,
if inserted into the earth,
its effect. 262
Burying aids drinking. 193
For fainting, rose water
and vinegar are used. 567

[Right Column]

Submersion under water, its nature.
461
Democritus, how he prolonged
his life. 570
Teeth, why they are more
affected by cold than other
parts. 397
Teeth endowed with sensation. 445
Things that harm teeth.
447
Descent or ascent of sound,
which is better. 137
Description of the Chameleon.
221, 222
To one looking down, objects
appear smaller. 137
Devil's-bit herb, its nature. 376
Diet of a pregnant woman,
how it affects the fetus. 596
Desiccating diets. 50
Diapason, its effect. 85
Diapason is a return of the
same sound. 126
Diapason from the striking
of an empty vessel. 128
Digestion in bodies, its
origin. 205
Expansion of gunpowder
from compression. 7
Tendency to discontinuation
in liquids is weak. 15
Disser-

--- Page 667 ---
**SUBJECTS.**

[Left Column]
*Dispersion of branches in*
*certain trees, whence.* 339
*Dissonance with the Bass,*
*what it does.* 88
*Dissonance, what it is.* 411
*Distortion of the face in grief,*
*whence.* 421
*Division of parts into sper-*
*matic and menstrual*
*is not sound.* 47
*To those dozing, why Music*
*is more pleasing.* 152
*Dragon's blood, what it is,*
*and where it is born espe-*
*cially.* 370
*Two voices, why they are not*
*heard further.* 149
*Ductile bodies have an*
*inclination not to dis-*
*continue themselves.* 511
*Sweet things promote putre-*
*faction.* 405
*Sweetness ought not to be*
*thick.* 363
*Sweetening, a step towards*
*nourishment.* 374
*Sweetening of fruits, in how*
*many ways it occurs, & the Cause.*
524, 525
*Hardness, whence.* 510

E.
*Amulet for drunkenness.*
430

[Right Column]
*The pleasure of drunkenness, next to that from*
*Venus.* 402
*Effects of drunkenness, and their*
*causes.* 428, 429
*Artificial echo not yet*
*invented.* 157
*Echo is a repercussion.* 100
*Natural echo, where it is gene-*
*rated.* 157
*Echo of the Charenton bridge in*
*Gaul.* 159
*Echo repeating voices four or five*
*times, how it happens.*
159
*A certain selection exists in all*
*bodies.* 482
*Electrum, what it is.* 65
*The common doctrine of the*
*elements is inept.* 501
*Elision of air is not the cause*
*of sound.* 100
*Nourishment of emaciated*
*persons.* 38
*Ephemeral flies.* 408
*Epidemic diseases, whence.*
237
*Horses' teeth signifying age.*
446
*The stench of a corpse frightens*
*horses, especially that of a*
*horse.* 475
*The act of eradicating useless*
*herbs benefits the body.* 578
*Hedgehog's flesh and ashes,*
*what*
Dd 6

--- Page 668 ---
**I N D E X**

| [Column 1] | [Column 2] |
| :--- | :--- |
| What they provide. 597 | The healthiness of the air to be investigated for more than one reason. 464 |
| Errhines drawing forth phlegm and humors. 32 | How the investigation of the air is done. 487, 488 |
| The essence of sound. 175 | Investigation of good seed. 309 |
| Why eunuchs suffer from weakness of sight. 401. They have signs of humidity. 401 | Investigated air indicates healthy years and places, and vice versa. 486 |
| Acrid milk of Euphorbium. 369 | Explosion of cannons without sound. 91 |
| Why we see more precisely with one eye. 531 | Explosion of a war cannon perceived at 20 miles. 169 |
| What excrements are. 404. Inside and outside the body they are fertile for insects. 405. Why they stink. 499 | Why extremely subtle things without acrimony are good in medicine. 399 |
| How excrescences in the human body can perhaps be removed. 605, 607 | Why the lighter front extremity of the body turns itself in throwing. 473 |
| What kind of initially more difficult exercises are beneficial. 267 | When cast skins are found and not scales. 434 |
| Exercises for prolonging life. 435 | **F.** |
| Exercises to which bodies they are suitable or harmful. 283 | Why longer fasting removes hunger. 495 |
| How another's imagination is affected by an external act. 476 | From where the opinion of fascination prevailed. 575 |
| What things prevent the exhalation of wine. 467 | What foods cause aversion. 184 |
| Exotic plants sprout here at the same time as in foreign lands. 331 | Fevers from obstructions. 205 |
| | Why cats and owls see at night |

--- Page 669 ---
R E R V M.
(OF THINGS.)

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

--- Page 670 ---
I N D E X

Fluxus & refluxus maris
eſt reſpiratio mundi
quibuſdam. 552
Fodinæ Germanicæ vege-
tabilibus abundant.
330
Fodinarum maligni va-
pores. 564
Fæces conſervant potum.
188. ſpiritus attenuant
in potu. ibid.
Fæces ſanguinis & pul-
vis ab urina ſeparati
quid præſtet. 597
Fæmina menſtruoſa ſpe-
culum inquinat, &
vermes in herbis ne-
cat. 566
Fæminæ cur viris viva-
ciores. 184
Fæminæ cur magis in
Venerem pronæ æſtate.
402
Fæniculi ſemen quale.
371
Fætor carceris periculo-
ſus. 562
Foliatanorum ordo. 37
Fontes naturales unde. 18
Fontes petrificantes. 67
Fontes qui optimi. 245
Fontis artificialis deſcri-
ptio. 16
Foſſæ & canales quomo-
do habenda. 439
Foſſio circa radices arbo-
ris prodeſt. 253, 265
Fraga quomodo ſerenda.
267
Fragilitatis cauſa quæ,
& contra. 508
Fragrantiam quid per-
dat. 497
Frangrantia unde. ibid.
Fraxinus apta ſtruendo
foco. 376
Fraxinus & ſambucus a-
liquando in turribus
natæ, & unde. 330
Fricatio mollis quid præ-
ſtet. 48
Fricatio cur magis proſit
quam exercitium. 537
Fricatio cur partes reddat
magis carnoſas. 536,
537
Frigidi effecta quomodo
exploranda. 235
Frigoris effectus in par-
tibus tangibilibus. 510
Frigus occulte laxat. 34
Frigus quomodo cauſetur
catharros. 34
Frigus activum eſt. 57
Frigus ſummū apud nos
non eſt. ibid.
Frigus arcet putrefactio-
nem. 208
Frigus pedum cur impe-
diat ſomnum. 442
Frigus

The ebb and flow of the sea
is the breathing of the world,
according to some. 552
German mines abound
in plants.
330
Harmful vapors of mines.
564
Dregs preserve drink.
188. They thin out the spirits
in drink. ibid.
What the dregs of blood and
powder separated from urine
accomplish. 597
A menstruating woman
stains a mirror, and
kills worms in plants.
566
Why women are more lively
than men. 184
Why women are more prone
to Venus in summer.
402
What fennel seed is like.
371
The dangerous stench of a
prison. 562
The order of the Foliatans. 37
Whence natural springs. 18
Petrifying springs. 67
Which springs are best. 245
Description of an artificial
spring. 16
How ditches and canals
should be maintained. 439
Digging around the roots of a
tree is beneficial. 253, 265
How strawberries should be
planted. 267
What the cause of fragility is,
and against it. 508
What destroys fragrance.
497
Whence fragrance. ibid.
Ash tree suitable for building
a hearth. 376
Ash and elder sometimes
grown in towers, and whence. 330
What gentle rubbing
accomplishes. 48
Why rubbing is more beneficial
than exercise. 537
Why rubbing makes parts
more fleshy. 536,
537
How the effects of cold should
be investigated. 235
Effects of cold on tangible
parts. 510
Cold secretly loosens. 34
How cold causes catarrhs.
34
Cold is active. 57
Extreme cold is not among
us. ibid.
Cold prevents putrefaction.
208
Why cold feet hinder
sleep. 442
Cold

--- Page 671 ---
R E R V M.

[Column 1]
*Cold and heat communicate*
*powers, not substance. 530*
*Late-appearing leaves indicate*
*the longevity of a tree,*
*and why. 37*
*How leaves are increased*
*by art. 281*
*Whence the density of leaves.*
*342*
*How a broad forehead*
*is made. 21*
*How various fruits are*
*obtained on one tree.*
*298*
*White fruits are less good.*
*303*
*What makes fruits stoneless.*
*306, 307*
*Which vessels preserve*
*fruits. 362*
*How the ripening of fruits*
*occurs, and in how many ways.*
*194. and following.*
*How the shapes of fruits*
*are varied by art. 299*
*Whence a double yield*
*of fruits. 334*
*Where grain and fruits are*
*preserved for a long time. 209*
*When grain first germinates,*
*it has milk. 369*
*Grain often degenerates*
*into darnel. 385*

[Column 2]
*What things help grain.*
*387*
*Soot is beneficial to fields and*
*gardens. 347*
*Fumitory is beneficial to the spleen.*
*399*
*Smoke preserves meat.*
*212*
*Why the bottom of a vessel*
*full of hot water allows*
*an unharmed hand. 395*
*Fungi, who are properly men.*
*320*
*Fungi grow on the trunks and*
*roots of trees. 369*
*What a fungus is, and whence it comes.*
*320*
*Bran contributes to preservation.*
*231*
*A mixture of bran and pig dung*
*nourishes well. 278*
G.
Galileo's motion

--- Page 672 ---
**I N D E X**

| | |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 673 ---
R E R V M.

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 674 ---
I N D E X

[Column 1]

How swallows are made white. 597
Spaniards and Italians skillfully cool places. 463
Bacon's Natural History is different from that of the ancients or the moderns. 390
A human corpse produces nails, hair. 322
Why a human head is hairy from birth. 393
How a human grows quickly. 216
Why a human is called an inverted plant. 354
When a human teethes. 446
How a human senses rain or frost in the body. 494
How soaked barley sprouts. 373
Shudder in the body from a dismal sound. 474
Moistening accelerates putrefaction. 207
Excessive humidity harms grain. 385
Why a humid and cold summer signifies a harsh winter. 489
Moisture does not pass through bodies without communica-

[Column 2]

-tion of substance. 395
External moisture as a cause of putrefaction. 226
Where humors abound, they benefit the parts. 32
In moisture there is a unifying force. 295
The fable of Hylas abducted, and its use in the doctrine of sounds. 114

          I.

A vigorous blow produces a vigorous sound. 119
Goose liver as a Roman delicacy. 37
How fasting is continued for 4 or 5 days. 570
Fire is more violent where it is more compressed. 27
Pure fire and in its natural place is moderately warm. 28
How fire rivals the Sun. 81
Why fire is stronger during frost. 233
The effects of fire in burning wood are not produced by hot water, and why. 394
Why artificial fire from bitumen is extin-
                    -guished

--- Page 675 ---
R E R V M.

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 676 ---
I N D E X
Indian land produces exotic | plants among us. 331
concerning an animal born from | decay. 404
Hardening with tenaci- | ty. 68
Hardening of bodies by | sympathy. 514
Lower parts of trees should be | cared for more than upper | parts. 264
Method of infusions. 13
Infusion should rather be repeated | than prolonged. | 11
Grafted shoots prevail over the | stock. 259
Grafting on a tender tree | and an old one. | 265
What grafting from heterogeneous | sources achieves. 272
What grafting continued for three or four | years achieves. 273
How many kinds of grafting of vine | on vine. 38

--- Page 677 ---
R E R V M.
(SUBJECTS.)

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
| *Iris, what it is. 496*                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

--- Page 678 ---
**INDEX**

**Left Column:**

Stone which burning is not consumed. 462
Stone around Bethlehem increases milk. 465
Larch moss, of what kind. 370
Weariness, why it is cured by a bath. 433
Laurel, how it should be planted. 267
Reader of this Natural History, what he ought to do. 311
Lemnos island, why consecrated to Vulcan. 414
Sea hare, why it has an antipathy with lungs. 598
Leucadians threw a man tied to birds into the sea. 541
Hoary stock and thryallis, useful in tertian or quartan fevers. 326
Effects of lust and their causes. 427
Cake to be applied to the stomach, of what kind. 44
Binding of the male member, has power from the imagination of the one tying. 588
Shining woods. 213, 214, 215
Purer wood, how

**Right Column:**

it may be examined. 378
Lincostis herb, of what kind. 372
Tongue, why it easily shows signs of illness. 398
Movements of the tongue, more than letters. 176
Linens anointed with oil of sweet almonds. 44
Liquefaction, what it is, and what bodies especially liquefy or not. 506, 507
Liquids produce circles in motion. 7
Certain letters, with what sound they are formed. 133
Low places or full of windows, not suitable for receiving fumigation. 571
An arched place does not so conveniently allow sounds to be heard. 132
Longevity of plants, how to be cared for by skill. 338
Length of the body through which sound passes, promotes sound. 105
Firefly. 420
Night-long light in the hall of the King of England. 231
With the waxing moon, what things are planted

--- Page 679 ---
R E R V M.

[Column 1]
...ted, etc., grow faster. 546
Principal lunar influences. 545
Wolf's skin is believed to soothe colicky pain, and why. 594, 595
Why a near-sighted person sees better close up and in dim light than one who is not near-sighted. 532
Light remarkably affects human spirits. 589, 590
Why the Irish lyre is so sonorous. 111

M.

How a grease stain may be removed. 71
Moistening requires imbibition. 503
Whence Natural Magic. 483
Indian Maize. 40
If oak apples have worms, it is a sign of plague. 327
From what wood the masts of ships are made. 379
What peach skins provide. 34
What Manna is, and the best in Calabria. 466
A hand anointed with egg white endures flame. 327

[Column 2]
A hand held out to the eyes opposite the sun or a candle helps, and why. 532, 533
Why males are more prone to sexual desire in winter time. 403
What the Dead Sea is like. 461
The likeness of male and female in all living things. 355
The surface of the sea produces plants. 329
Why sea sand produces rare plants. 330
March reveals the effects of the past winter and of the coming summer. 486
What kind of matter ought to be vivified, and why. 550
Various affections of matter, and their causes. 512, 513
How the maturation of drink occurs. 192
Mauritanians render sea water fresh. 1
Media elsewhere gives flames without smoke. 223
Medicines moving the bowels. 35
Medicines moving urine. 36
Medica-

--- Page 680 ---
I N D E X

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     **Medicamenti & alimenti mutatio prodest. 55**
Change of medicine and food is beneficial. 55
**Medici vulgares negligentes. 78**
Common physicians are negligent. 78
**Medulla melius nutrit quam pinguedo. 37**
Marrow nourishes better than fat. 37
**Medullae in arbore perforatio tollit sterilitatem. 263**
Perforation of the pith in a tree removes barrenness. 263
**Melancholici in congressu faciunt alios tales. 573**
Melancholics in company make others like them. 573
**Mel in quibus arboribus inveniatur. 297**
In which trees honey is found. 297
**Melicratum in Wallia quale. 515**
What kind of mead in Wales. 515
**Melligo quid. 384**
What honeydew is. 384
**Melioratio ubi tentatur recurrendum ad rerum principia. 522**
Where improvement is attempted, one must return to the first principles of things. 522
**Membra dextri lateris cur validiora. 536**
Why the limbs of the right side are stronger. 536
**Memoria ex quibus animantibus juvetur. 595**
From which animals memory is aided. 595
**Mercatores vendentes carnem humanam. 17**
Merchants selling human flesh. 17
**Mercurialia quam purgantium vim habeant. 35**
What purgative power mercurials have. 35
**Mercurii spiritus petit cranium, & quomodo prohibeatur illud. 564**
The spirit of mercury attacks the skull, and how that may be prevented. 564
**Mercurius idem praestat cum pulvere pyrio. 24**
Mercury achieves the same with gunpowder. 24
**Mercurius vivus optime adhibetur corporibus**
Quicksilver is best used for bodies | [Right Column]
**conservandis. 477**
for preserving. 477
**Metalla non satis expurgantur. 516**
Metals are not sufficiently purified. 516
**Metus quomodo solvat alvum. 35**
How fear loosens the bowels. 35
**Mineralia unde. 65**
Whence minerals. 65
**Minutalia optime nutrientia. 43**
Small dishes (or minced meats) best nourishing. 43
**Missilia lignea lemures dicta olim cur magis penetrabant lignum quam glans plumbea. 415, 416**
Why wooden missiles, formerly called lemures, once penetrated wood more than a lead bullet. 415, 416
**Mollescunt corpora ex defossione quomodo. 234**
How bodies become soft from burial. 234
**Mollities unde. 510**
Whence softness. 510
**Mollium species duae. ib. 511**
Two kinds of soft things. ib. 511
**Montes cur magis quam valles aut plana tempestates significent. 490**
Why mountains signify storms more than valleys or plains. 490
**Morbi chronici cur saepe excessu curentur. 50, 51**
Why chronic diseases are often cured by excess. 50, 51
**Morbi qui maxime periculosi. 52**
Which diseases are most dangerous. 52
**Morbi chronici curati per allium, etc. 76**
Chronic diseases cured by garlic, etc. 76
**Morbi contagiosi quo modo nocent. 182**
How contagious diseases harm. 182
**Morbo regio quid medeatur. 609**
What remedies the king's evil. 609
**Mors quomodo viventibus supervenit. 47**
How death overtakes the living. 47
**Mors unde formidanda. 371**
Whence death is to be feared. 371
**Mortis**
Of death

--- Page 681 ---
R E R V M.
(INDEX OF THINGS.)

*   Cause of death. 246
*   Why the harvest of Muscovy falls into our season, since the grain finally sprouts in late spring. 334
*   Motion from pressure breaks where the body is weaker. 7
*   Motion of compression in solid bodies is not so apparent to sight. ib.
*   Motion of compression in liquids. ibid.
*   What is the motion of freedom. 8
*   Why the motion of gravity is slow at a great and small distance from the earth. 28
*   Frequent motion from sympathy in the body. 31
*   Bodily and mechanical motions. 79
*   Great motions without sound. 92
*   Wonderful mummies of the Egyptians. 458. Their virtue and origin. 597
*   That the world is an animal is the Pythagorean and Platonic opinion. 552
*   Murmur in the waters as an indication of wind. 491
*   What kind of cantharides flies. 432

*   How flies, as if dead, are revived. 443
*   How moss on a tree is removed. 267. What it is and where it grows. 317, 318, 319. What moss grown on the skull of a human corpse provides. 597
*   Why music is more sonorous in water. 110. It has figures similar to rhetorical and other senses. 90
*   The efficacy of music on emotions. 91
*   How must is quickly boiled down. 392
*   Change of color in hairs and feathers. 73. How it can be prevented in bodies. 82. The cause of hair changing color due to age. 517
*   Quality of myrobalans. 34
*   What is a myrobalan. 371

N.

**N**ani: admirable figures. 20
*   Species of nard in chalk. 359
*   Noses and ears by cold

--- Page 682 ---
I N D E X

mortificatæ & igni ad-
motæ cur putrescant. 471
Naturæ clavis duplex.
483.
Nili cataractas qui acco-
lunt surdi. 169. ejus
aqua quomodo clarifi-
cetur ab Aegyptiis.
406. aqua cur minus
cruda. 406. aquæ me-
dicæ. 456
Nitrosa aqua mundat. 35.
incinerat. 223
Nitrum sive sal petræ
causa est vehementiæ
in pulvere pyrio. 24.
lacti inditum vivaces
& pusillos reddit ca-
tulos. 218
Nitrum & creta aquis
admixta possent lac
pecudibus augere. 465
Nivalis aqua insalubris.
243
Nix aqua cur frigidior.
59
Nix & glacies salem
mutat in glaciem. 66
Nix gignit herbas &
vermes. 329. terram
diu tegens cur fœcun-
ditatem indicet. 381.
quid sit. 382. generat
vermem, & qualem.
406

Nocte soni cur suaviores.
152
Noctes claræ cur sint nu-
bilis frigidiores. 530
Nodi in plantis quid præ-
stent. 340
Novitas ciborum cur gra-
tior. 185
Nubecula in vitro aut la-
mina ensis ex anhelitu.
71
Numæ cadaver repertum.
460

O.

OBjecta visus in me-
dio non confunden-
tur. 147. cur recreent
spiritus. 534
Objectum visus celerius
movetur quam audi-
tus. 140
Obscæna videntibus quo-
modo displiceant. 169
Obscurum locum intrans
ex magna luce & con-
tra, cur caliget. 533
Occhus arbor in Hyrca-
nia mel destillat. 358
Oculi ex dolore cur ru-
bescant. 533
Oculus elisus restitutus.
247. velocior auditu. 99
Odoratus quid. 91. canum
habet

---

**Translation:**

I N D E X

why things killed and brought to
fire rot. 471
Nature's twofold key.
483.
Those who dwell near the cataracts
of the Nile are deaf. 169. how its
water is clarified by the Egyptians.
406. why the water is less
raw. 406. medicinal waters. 456
Nitrous water cleanses. 35.
incinerates. 223
Niter or saltpeter is the
cause of force in gunpowder. 24.
added to milk, it makes puppies
lively and small. 218
Niter and chalk mixed with water
could increase milk for livestock. 465
Snow water is unhealthy.
243
Why snow is colder than water.
59
Snow and ice change salt
into ice. 66
Snow produces herbs and
worms. 329. why covering the earth
for a long time indicates fertility. 381.
what it is. 382. generates a worm,
and what kind. 406

Why sounds are sweeter at night.
152
Why clear nights are colder
than cloudy nights. 530
What knots in plants achieve.
340
Why new foods are more pleasing.
185
A mist on glass or a sword
blade from breath. 71
Numa's corpse found.
460

O.

Visual objects are not
confused in the middle. 147. why
they refresh the spirits. 534
The object of sight moves faster
than that of hearing. 140
How obscene things displease
those who see them. 169
Why, entering a dark place
from a great light and conversely,
one becomes dim-sighted. 533
The Occhus tree in Hyrcania
drips honey. 358
Why eyes become red from pain.
533
A crushed eye restored.
247. quicker than hearing. 99
What the sense of smell is. 91. dogs
possess

--- Page 683 ---
R E R V M.
(OF THINGS.)

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

--- Page 684 ---
**I N D E X**

**Column 1:**

Bones, when they cease to
grow. 444
Pits in fruits, whence. 521
Contusions of bones are not
easily cured in cold
weather. 398
Colchester oysters, how
they fatten. 415
Eggs from alabaster in
fevers. 76
Boiled and roasted eggs are
not distinguished. 395
Ostrich eggs, how they are
hatched. 523
Sheep and cattle dislike
Souch. 369
Egg yolk, what it provides
to the chick. 74
Sheep, why a cold animal.
449
Use of eggs in clarification.
5
Egg, when it floats in
water. 472
Egg with the hardness of
stone. 66
Hawthorn, why it never
sweetens. 371
The sharpness of oxymel,
what kind. 35

**P.**

Paleness in anger, whence.
423

**Column 2:**

Pantomimes express actors.
156
Paracelsus's pygmies. 81
Walls which are most
wholesome. 571
Part of the body, why it
becomes numb from
leaning on it. 435
Acceleration of childbirth,
twofold. 216
Passions, how they affect
the body. 420
Cloyngly sweet parsnips
indicate plague. 399
Perception in all bodies,
twofold. 482
Percolation of salt water
through sea sands. 1.
through vessels placed one
upon another. 2. it is
varied according to the
nature of the bodies
through which the trans-
mission occurs. 3. it is a
kind of separation. 3. it
also contributes to sweet-
ness. 5. internal and
external. 191
Perforation of a tree trunk
and insertion of a wedge,
what it achieves. 273
To those suffering from
plague, diarrhea is often
lethal. 51
Pestilential year, whence it
is inferred. 436
Plague [catchword]

--- Page 685 ---
**OF THINGS.**

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               

--- Page 686 ---
I N D E X

Plutarch is not the author
  of the treatise on primary
  cold.               57
Rain and dew, whence.    19
Gout, whence.        494
Polyp worms are said to
  purify blood.      405
Species of polypody from
  trees.             381
Why an impelled weight
  strikes more strongly
  than one merely placed. 454
The poplar bears moss, and
  what kind.         370
Porcelain, what.      65
Pig's dung sweetens
  fruits.            276
Porous things impede sounds
  little, differently from
  solids.            167
A drink against melancholy
  from orange tree flowers. 12
A medicinal drink useful
  after the time of the
  full moon.         547
Why the drinker's seed is
  sterile.           428
What preparation before
  purgation achieves. 53
How illusionists deceive
  people a-ris

--- Page 687 ---
R E R V M.

[Left Column]
Why the operation of purgatives only follows after some hours. 31.
How an unpleasant taste is removed. 13.
Virtue is not a hidden property. 30.
Where force resides. 13.
Whence the purple dye. 542.
Why putrefied things stink. 499, 500.
Why certain putrefactions are of good odor. ibid.
Causes of putrefaction. 502.
What putrefaction is. 203. It is defined (or occurs) either in plants or in animals. 352.

Q.

Those things which compress sound, preserve and increase it. 108.
Certain things are good food only after having undergone fire. 364.
Which ones bear fruit throughout the whole year. 335.
What kind of person he ought to be in whom imagination may be effective. 581.
The quality of the air indicates the quality of the earth. 486.
Qualities in plants

[Right Column]
that are to be changed ought to turn into the plant's nourishment. 294.
In how many ways a greater quantity of air can be struck. 124.
The fourth in music is harsh. 87.
The oak is warm and grows slowly. 376. It bears many fruits besides its own. 366.
Whatever makes a tree late-fruiting also makes it long-lived. 338.
What constitutes plants. 364.
Why those who appear a little after rains are usually seized by illness. 484.
In how many ways sound is made louder. 113.

R.

Whence bulbous, fibrous, and hairy roots. 359.
Roots of Potado and Burdock. 59.
How the roots of Potado grow large. 280.
What salt, wine dregs, and blood, applied to roots, achieve.

--- Page 688 ---
I N D E X

**Left Column:**

      achieve.             273
Annual death of roots,
  whence.                  270
Orris root smells more fra-
  grant than the flower,
  leaves do not smell fra-
  grant.                   529
Peony root, an amulet
  against epilepsy & incu-
  bus, & for what reason.  592
How the root thickens.    266
Low branches bear larger
  fruits. 264. If they are
  prevented from growing,
  what the plant will pro-
  duce.                    325
How the same branch bears
  grapes of various colors. 283
Method of exploring the
  time in which sound is
  transmitted.             139
Why the reflection of sound
  occurs better against old
  walls.                   475
Whether refraction exists
  in sounds, & what it
  achieves.                162
Renewal of sound is what
  people commonly think is
  continuation.            138
Filling out the stature of
  a tree is harmful.       315
Why things appear double.  532

**Right Column:**

He resists who suddenly
  hears something, & why.  421
What cause difficulty of
  breathing from cold has. 442
Retention of breath inten-
  sifies hearing.          173
How to use rhubarb & simi-
  lar things.              33
How rhubarb is best pre-
  pared.                   12
Effects of laughter. 425.
  Causes of effects. 426.
  Scarcely to be called a
  passion.                 426
Rose more pleasing from the
  vicinity of garlic. 286.
  Late-blooming best.      256
Damask roses long unknown
  to the English.          380
Dew, whence. 19. In pot
  lids, whence.            ibid.
Dew & rain, whence.        64
May dew, where best.       467
Rotation of bodies from
  East to West, whence.    559
Roundness in water drops,
  whence.                  16
Fruit of the bramble infects
  with scabies.            432
Redness, what it is, & where
  it is observed.          424
                        Russia

--- Page 689 ---
R E R V M.
(OF THINGS.)

[Left Column]

Russia uses mead.
  515
Why rue grows better when
  placed near a fig tree. 286

      S.

Why sugar separated from
  wine dissolves more quickly
  than that in wine. 540, 541.
  What kind it was among the
  ancients. 514, 515. Scarcely
  known to the ancients. 357
A sack full of bran to be
  applied to the stomach.
  45
Why witches and sorceresses
  feed on human flesh. 18.
  And why they can do nothing
  against kings. 554, 555
Why trust should not be given
  to the confessions and proofs
  of deeds of witches. 556
What causes the properties
  of the salamander have.
  527
What kind of herb Salgaxus
  is. 372
What salt or a caustic
  substance inserted into the
  anus provokes expulsion. 32

[Right Column]

How saltpeter is produced.
  346
What kind of pungency salt
  has. 35
Things that stop blood. 54
Blood of living creatures,
  tainted. 372. Why raw (blood)
  overcomes flesh with
  corruption. 418. Why, mixed
  with salt water, it removes
  corruption. 598
How the Santones enchant
  the betrothed on the day of
  betrothal. 542
Satiety of the earth is a
  disease. 3

--- Page 690 ---
I N D E X

[Left Column]

Separation of wine from water
  by ivy wood. 4.
  by twin glass. 9.
  certain considerations concerning it, &
  whence it occurs. 10
Separation to be attempted in
  brine & fresh water,
  sugar & pure water. 10
Why cuttlefish blood is black.
  440
The sixth in music is harsh.
  87
Sex variously distinguishes
  living beings, & what
  the causes are. 518, 519
Whence hiccup arises.
  396
Solution of continuity aids pu-
  trefaction. 215
Why sleep nourishes most. 45.
  to whom it benefits after lunch. ibid.
  it benefits after breakfast.
  46. why it more strongly
  excites sweat. 418. it nou-
  rishes and preserves for a long
  time without food. 442
What musical sounds are. 83.
  what are not musical. 84.
  inducing sleep. 89.
  can be generated without
  the aid of air. 106.
  why in the evening or at night

[Right Column]

they are heard longer. 109.
they move in all directions. 135.
when conglomerated, they rarefy
the air. 165.
what delights or the opposite. 411.
they are confused in the middle. 147.
what the cause is. 148
Swift diffusion of sounds.
  176
What produces musical sounds.
  84
Whence & how the sound of a bell &
  harpsichord is often extinguished. 8.
  how it is produced in
  instruments. 84.
  it recurs after 6 or 12. 87.
  a loud one makes deaf. 103.
  whence the sound of a hunting
  horn is intensified. 108.
  a harsh one dulls the teeth. 112.
  it is communicated to the spirits
  in the pores of the body.
  112. interior & exterior. 129, 130.
  diminished, it is dispersed
  through the entire air. 131.
  it is not disturbed by winds. ibid.
  which is better. 152.
  how & why a harsh one dulls
  the teeth. 411
Whence spasm, & its
  remedy. 591
Spe-

--- Page 691 ---
R E R V M.

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

--- Page 692 ---
I N D E X

[Left Column]

lower parts. 418
Retraction of the calves upwards. 21
What a sigh is. 421
What the sympathy of individuals is like. 561. In musical instruments. 172, 173
How syrups are clarified by pharmacists. 5

T.

Properties of tobacco. 567. Why the root or seed is not taken. 438
Why tobacco drives away weariness. 433. How and why dried tobacco recovers weight. 441. Why English and Virginian tobacco is cheaper. 552. How it can be improved. 522, 523
Nourishment of the wasting/emaciated. 39
Why tamarinds never sweeten. 371
Tangible things that are cold by themselves. 58
Tartar in wine vessels. 70
Yew, a strong tree &

[Right Column]

flexible. 342
Why a clothed person sweats more easily in the sun than a naked one. 417
Telesius, the most outstanding philosopher among the Neoterics. 57
A temple in Italy reflecting sound twelve times. 475
Time weakens things. 22. Why it acts differently in fruits and liquids. 527, 528
Tenor, the middle voice in music, why it is the sweetest. 122
Preparation of earth for changing plants. 313, 314. Its surface is usually very fertile. 346. What kinds of medicinal earth there are and with what efficacy. 413. All earth is nitrous. 3. It does not filter water as well as sand. 3. The first cold thing. 57. What it achieves when aided. 255. Earth facing south is good. 348. What earth is good. 382. What earth is fertile. 383. Medicinal earth has few veins. 413. How and why the earth of the Nile increases in weight.

--- Page 693 ---
R E R V M .
(OF THINGS.)

| [Left Column]                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

--- Page 694 ---
I N D E X
[Vertical line separating columns]

V.
Fumes of enclosed charcoal, why harmful.
565. from colocynth, causes evacuation. 566
Porcelain vessels, how they are made. 233
A vessel filled with ashes does not receive the same quantity of water. 29. What is the reason. ibid.
Sound of a struck vessel. 107.
Liquor from a full vessel, poured into bottles, why it does not afterwards fill the vessel. 529
Decayed vegetables help the soil. 347
Parts of vegetables, some nourish more, others less. 37
A sorceress, how she can harm. 583
Immediate poisons from human flesh and fat. 18
Malignity of poisoners, how to be curbed. 288
Suspicion of poison, whence it arises. 31
Poison mixed with sweet odors harms more quickly. 564
South winds without

rain, why unhealthy. 469
Wind raises or lowers sounds. 101
Overloading of the stomach

--- Page 695 ---
R E R V M.
(OF SUBJECTS.)

*   Vines, where they grow better. 383
*   Spirits of wine harm the body's humors. 43
*   Use of wine, to whom it benefits or harms, and why. 430
*   Hippocratic wine, how it is clarified. 5.
*   burnt, is praised in fevers. 14.
*   burnt up, in wasting of bodies. 43.
*   with sugar, why it intoxicates less than pure. 403
*   Vipers, applied externally, are beneficial. 592
*   Troches of vipers, what they achieve. 400
*   Husbands loving their wives are said to have perceived their childbirth from a symptom. 600
*   Visible things, how they communicate with each other. 166
*   Vision does not happen without light. 168
*   Prolongation of life, in what it consists. 47. how it is obtained. 178
*   Egg yolks. 42
*   Low vines in France provide wine. 264
*   modern ones are smaller than ancient ones. 361
*   Defects of crops, what prevents them. 386

*   Vitex wood supplied staffs to Roman centurions. 361.
*   durable and tough. ibid.
*   Venetian crystal glasses, from where they are made. 457
*   The interiors of living things nourish more than the exterior flesh. 38
*   Vivification, from where it happens. 204. in what it consists. 502
*   The axiom of vivification is that heat is required for dilating the spirit. 467, 550.
*   nature, how much it is to be valued. 403
*   If we used living creatures, Paracelsus thinks we could become immortal. 400
*   Owls, why they see at night. 531
*   Shadow, why it trembles at the edge. 538.
*   it helps foliage. 356
*   Waves of the sea, why unequal where it is wider. 538
*   Ointments of magicians, of what kind and what they achieve. 557.
*   of witches, from where they are made. 595
*   Splendid description of the weapon-salve. 606
*   Ointment-

--- Page 696 ---
I N D E X O F T H I N G S.

| [Left Column] | [Right Column] |
| :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--- Page 697 ---
[Decorative woodcut border with scrollwork and masks]

*The Great Works of Nature, especially*
*as regards human uses.*

1. **P**rolongation of life.
2. Partial restoration of youth.
3. Retardation of old age.
4. Cure of diseases which are called incurable.
5. Mitigation of pains.
6. Easier and not so harsh purgatives.
7. Increase of strength and activity.
8. Increased capacity to endure punishments and torments.
9. Alteration of complexion, or bodily constitution, and of obesity and thinness.
10. Alteration of stature.
11. Alteration of form.
12. Aug-

--- Page 698 ---
12. Augmentation and exaltation of the intellectual faculties.
13. Conversion of one body into another.
14. Production of new species.
15. Transplantation or conversion
of one species into another.
16. Instruments of destruction, as
in war, and poisons.
17. Exhilaration of the spirits, and their
good disposition.
18. Power of imagination upon another's,
or one's own body.
19. Acceleration of time in maturations.
20. Acceleration of time in clarifications.
21. Acceleration of putrefaction.
22. Acceleration of decoction.
23. Acceleration of germination.
24. Splendid display in earth
compositions.
25. Impressions of the air, and excitation
of storms.
26. Great alterations; as in hardening,
softening, etc.
27. Trans-

--- Page 699 ---
27. Transmutation of crude and watery
substance into oily and un-
ctuous substance.
28. Extraction of new nourishment from sub-
stances, now no longer in use.
29. Making of new thread for the use of
garments; and of new ma-
terial, such as paper, glass,
etc.
30. Natural divinations.
31. Deceptions of the senses.
32. Greater pleasures of the senses.
33. Artificial minerals and ce-
ments.

[Decorative fleuron ornament]

When

--- Page 700 ---
*Since the Translator has changed very little in the text, and because of his absence from the press, several errors have crept into this edition, the Kind Reader will restore the reading and thus correct the more serious typographical errors, and will himself correct the lighter ones (if there are any).*

Wherever 'solitary experiment' occurs, 'single' may be read.
Page 2, line 6: read *fontes*. ibid. line 19: read *exuisse*.
Page 4, line 18: read *aut virides*.
Page 6, line 7: read *& vulgo*.
Page 18, line 15: read *calendari*.
Page 19, line 21: read *alembici*.
Page 21, line 11: read *habitioreſque*.
Page 24, line 14: for 'wild fire' read 'artificial (fire) from bitumen, etc.'
Page 26, line 22: read *corpora cœlestia*.
Page 28, line 23: read *sententia fuit*.
Page 33, line 27: delete 'in'.
Page 34, line 3: read *(pleraque saltem) decocta*.
Page 35, line 7: read *in nervis*.
Page 37, line 11: read *Foliatanorum*.
Page 38, line 6: read *medulla cancri*.
Page 39, line 17: read *statim in venas*.
Page 41, line 21: read *in omnibus*.
Page 45, line 5: read *frustrum carnis*.
Page 47, line 4: read *emacianti*.
Page 48, line 1: read *prolicit*. ibid. line 6: read *lanæ coccineæ, intincta*.
Page 53, line 16: read *exitum*.
Page 60, line 6: read *posita*.
Page 65, line 4: read *proprietas est*. ibid. line 24: read *fractis*.
Page 67, line 23: read *ut in lateribus*.
Page 68, line 9: read *media via*. ibid. line 25: read *exclusa*.
Page 73, line 5: read *ungens*. ibid. line 25: read *alborem*.
Page 76, line 12: read *fugeret*.
Page 77, line 7: read *prospectiva quæ*. ibid. line 22: read *Sapientia Veterum*.
Page 92, line 11: delete 'experimenta'.
Page 93, line 15: read *transeunteque*.
Page 102, line 21: delete 'hic'.
Page 114, line 6: read *continue*.
Page 121, line 22: read *si se reduplicat*.
Page 128, line 16: read *Diapason usque maximum*.
Page 129, line 23: read *unius differat*.
Page 144, line 1: delete 'à dissipatione'. ibid. line 11: read *perturbationem, sonitus*.
Page 145, line 14: read *declinatio*.
Page 148, line 4: read *imposita utrique*.
Page 150, line 11: read *aëre aperto*.
Page 154, line 12: read *metallicis, quam fidibus ex intestinis*. ibid. line 18: read *artifices*.
Page 157, line 22: read *echûs generatio*.
Page 165, line 13: read *capax (ut ventus.)*.
Page 168, line 21: read *repercusso, motu*.
Page 171

--- Page 701 ---
p.171.l.5. coalescing. p.175.l.18. to be pure
of sound. p.180.l.3. mistletoe. p.199.l.10. read, for that earlier thing,
certainly the heaviest and most material among metals, has difficulties not easily
explained, if you try to make it from others, by no means equaling the weight and
matter of gold; and it would be an easier task to prepare silver
from lead or mercury, yet exceeding the weight of silver; so that
rather greater, etc. p.200. l.4. too much. p.218. l.24.
as fathers. p.222.l.23. turned towards the rays. p.225.l.16.
instead of in that form, etc. read cone. p.234. l.9.
introduced into the earth. p.236.l.1. quite northern. ibid.
l.16. at that time. p.246. l.7. and a dark color,
everywhere. p.249.l.28. delete humano. p.259.l.3. of the
early-ripening tree, engrafted. ibid. l.14. pertaining to improve-
ment. p.281.l.11. as if the brim of a hat. p.282.
l.1. distinguishes sex. ibid. l.5. mixtures of species.
p.287.l.20. radish pungency. p.291. l.9. however, unless with.
p.300. l.17. let it be introduced. p.303. l.18. they resemble berries.
p.305. l.3. or with large pears. ibid. l.14. leaves turn yellow from
decay, and from holm oaks some have yellow leaves, which.
p.317.l.18. pellitory; and in almost every moss the stem is tiny.
p.320. l.29. inserted. p.323. l.15. of mistletoe-like plants. p.324. l.2.
instead of misseltoe read viscum. & l.5,8,22. p.326. l.18. instead of viscus read
lanugo. p.334. l.9. it happens that from. p.337. l.29. are
without ruins. p.339. l.11. they rise threefold. ibid. l.24. not by
haste. p.341.l.2. instead of germinationem read expansionem.
p.348.l.6. heather. p.351.l.13,14. petroleum, heat for itself.
p.352. l.6. substitutes for itself. p.355. l.10. contact. p.357.l.23.
at a further node. p.358. l.8. from fruits. p.361.l.7. vines below.
p.362. l.5. let it be of both. p.373.l.15. it appears. Let a similar
experiment be made with beans and peas. But this seems different to them
in the wild and in houseleek: for those.
                                                                   ibid.

--- Page 702 ---
ibid. l. 17. to need the earth's help. p. 374. l. 13, 14. one out of eight bushels at least will have grown. p. 375. l. 2. for 'cortex' read 'folliculus'. p. 376. l. 18. and therefore slowly. p. 379. l. 28. for 'in hifce' read 'in quibusdam'. p. 381. l. 7. thamno. ibid. l. 23. although of the ancients. p. 383. l. 1. I do not deny. ibid. l. 11. for 'pinguis' read 'tenera'. p. 393. l. 13. perspirable. p. 400. l. 9. opinion, similar. p. 404. l. 16. water into mud. p. 412. l. 11. the end with teeth. p. 413. veins of medicinal earth. ibid. l. 10. and as if fixing. p. 414. l. 6. coming together at the sides. p. 417. l. 17. add 'non efficit, &c.'. p. 428. l. 21. after 'unde' place 'non tener, &c. atque inertes'. p. 438. l. 15. place 'arcuatim producto' for 'fornicis in morem ex prospectiva adornato'. p. 439. l. 9. add 'pro vestim. &c.'. p. 448. l. 18. uniform generation. ibid. l. 8. place 'corallium' for 'crystallum'. ibid. l. 16. birds. p. 452. l. 12. for 'majorem' read 'magnam'. p. 454. l. 20. for 'laxationem' read 'impressionem'. p. 458. l. 5. in the place of glass-making. p. 460. l. 15. for seasoning. p. 462. l. 15. let it warm. ibid. last line. for 'accenso' place 'consumpto'. p. 463. l. 5. after 'erica' add '& stercus bovinum exsiccatum'. ibid. l. 8. far vigorous. p. 473. last line. for 'fere' place 'omnino'. p. 475. l. 9. add 'non feritur, &c.'. ibid. l. 24. add 'non cessat'. p. 478. l. 13. for 'tam' read 'tum'. p. 481. l. 5. although they are continuous bodies. 483. l. 28. mature. p. 492. l. 2. or of thistles. p. 497. l. 1. delete ',' after 'aqua'. & l. 5. delete 'congelatae'. & l. 15. delete 'vesperi olere'. ibid. and of all smells. p. 506. l. 15. for 'integra' read 'continua'. p. 507. l. 14. ignorant of melting, yet they soften (the rest should be deleted) so that completely and quickly. p. 115. l. 1. it would be forced to thickness. p. 521. l. 6. with juice from a drier (thing). p. 522. l. 16. now in perfection's (state). p. 526. l. 2. their nature. p. 542. l. 21. l'eguillette. p. 545. l. 16. cinders. 548. l. 19. drink. p. 549. they sleep through winter. p. 553. l. 1. & 2. with the body in an instant. l. 26. which power of imagination, l. 29. from superstition.

--- Page 703 ---
from superstitious and magical. p. 557. l. 24. `restitet`. p. 560.
l. 15. `quas`. p. 563. l. 22. artificial contagion of the air. p. 568.
l. 24. filled with aromatics for ca-tarrhs. ibid. l. 26. for fumigation. p. 569.
l. 18. after `suffi-torio`, a period. p. 570. l. 23. instead of `herbarum` read `illis herbis`.
p. 571. l. 6. `aut` instead of `dant`. p. 572. l. 20. `tene-rae`. p. 574.
l. 19. whether not boldness, industry, and his pressing im-portunity, may dominate by a hidden con-striction and inclination of another's spirits into such [persons/things].
p. 576. l. 3. `timoris`. l. 24. are spread among popular cir-cumstances/conversations. p. 579.
l. 19. and you see. p. 587. l. 4. `levissimam`. p. 489. l. 22. stones may corro-borate. p. 595.
l. 10. better for dogs. p. 596. l. 13. may swallow too effective [a thing]. p. 599. l. 23. let the internal movement teach.

THE END.

[Decorative woodcut ornament featuring fruit, flowers, and foliage]

--- Page 704 ---
[Several lines of faint, mirrored bleed-through text from the preceding page]

T H E E N D

[Decorative printer's ornament or tailpiece]

[Faint bleed-through text from the preceding page]

--- Page 705 ---
**NEW ATLAS,**
An unfinished work,
\*Written in Latin\*
By B.
\*The Illustrious Man\*
FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM, &c.
WITH
A Preface by W. RAWLEY.

--- Page 706 ---
NOVUS ATLAS
New Atlas

Opus imperfectum
An unfinished work

Latine conscriptum
Written in Latin

A B.
By B.

Illustri viro
By the illustrious man

FRANCISCO BACONE
FRANCIS BACON

DE VERULAMIO, &c.
OF VERULAM, etc.

M. D. C. [unclear]
M. D. C. [unclear]

Traditione W. RAWLEY.
By the transmission of W. RAWLEY.

--- Page 707 ---
3

[Decorative woodcut ornament with a central face and floral motifs]

TO THE READER
Greetings.

[Decorative initial F] This fable of New Atlantis
the most honorable author conceived with this intention,
that in it he might present a certain model and description of a College,
established for the interpretation of nature, and the greatness and power of works;
and that he might distinguish it by the name of Solomon's House,
or the College of the Works of the Six Days. And he extended
the thread of his discourse thus far, until he completed this.
The model, (I confess) according to the custom of Poetics,
is grander and loftier than what, in all respects, might be open to imitation;
but nevertheless, in most things, human industry should not despair of itself.
He also had in mind, in this very fable, a book concerning
                                  a 2               legi-

--- Page 708 ---
4        TO THE READER.
laws, or concerning the best state of a Commonwealth,
to write; but since he foresaw that this work
would be lengthy; and also was carried away by the desire
of collecting Natural History, and of weaving together
other parts of the Instauration (which he considered
far more important); here he stopped.
    New Atlantis, as far as the English edition
is concerned, found its place here by my Lord's decision,
because of its great affinity, for the most part, with
    the Natural History, which precedes
        it.


                    VV. RAWLEY.


                    [A decorative fleuron]


                                        FRAN-

--- Page 709 ---
5
[Decorative ornament]
OF FRANCIS BACON
OF VERULAM,
THE NEW ATLAS.

We were sailing from Peru, where we had stayed for a whole year. We were seeking, however, China and Japan, carrying twelve months' provisions with us; and for the space of five months, and more, with favorable winds blowing from the East, although light-
posi-

--- Page 710 ---
6 OF FRANCIS BACON
our provisions spent, without supplies,
we plainly thought ourselves lost, and
expected death to be near. Nevertheless,
we lifted our hearts and voices to God in the Heavens;
*Who shows His wonders in the deeps;*
praying to Him for His Mercy,
that, just as in the beginning,
He commanded the *Gathering of the Waters*,
and made the *Dry Land* appear; so now
He would also show us land, lest we
perish. It happened however, that on the following
day, towards evening, within a moderate distance,
we discerned, towards the North, as
it were thick Clouds: which gave us hope of land,
being well aware that that tract
of the *South Sea* was entirely unknown:
and could contain Islands and Continents,
not yet discovered;
therefore, that whole night, we directed our course thither,
where the land, as we conjectured, had
shown itself: and at dawn on the next
day, it was manifest that what we had seen
was truly land, indeed low-lying
and woody: which had made it appear more obscure.
And after an hour and a half's
sailing, we reached the Safe Port:
the Port of a certain city, not great
indeed, but beautifully built, and
which, from the side facing the Sea, had an ele-
			gance.

--- Page 711 ---
N O V U S A T L A S.          7
gance displayed great elegance. But we,
finding every moment slow by which
we were away from land, hastened to the shore,
and prepared ourselves for descent onto land.
Immediately, however, we saw some of the
city's people, with staffs in their hands, who by
nod and signs forbade us to descend onto land:
yet without shouts or ferocity. Whereupon,
greatly saddened, we deliberated among ourselves
what was to be done.

Mean-
while, a boat, not very large, proceeded towards
us, carrying about eight men; one of whom
carried in his hand a staff of yellow reed,
imbued with blue color at both ends. He
confidently boarded our ship. And when he
had seen one of ours coming forward to meet
him, he drew from his bosom a certain scroll
of parchment, (but our parchment was a little
yellower, and shining like the leaves of codi-
cils, but otherwise quite soft and flexible.)
And he gave it into the hand of him who had
first offered himself from among us. In which
Scroll, in ancient Hebrew, also ancient Greek,
quite pure Latin, and Spanish, these Words
were written; *“Do not descend onto land;*
*much less any one of you. Moreover, hasten your*
*departure from these Shores,”*
          a 4

--- Page 712 ---
8 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OF FRANCIS BACON
ten, within sixteen days, unless permission
is granted to you to remain longer. Meanwhile,
if you need fresh water, or provi-
sions, or medicine and care for the
sick, or if your ship needs re-
pair, present in writing each thing which you
lack. But we will not fail you in any acts of mercy.
That scroll was sealed with a seal of the wings
of Cherubim, not at all spread out, but hanging
downwards, and a cross next to them. This
having been handed over, that Minister
departed, and left one of his retinue
with us, who might carry back our
answer. When we now among ourselves were
deliberating about this matter, we hesitated,
timid and anxious. To be kept from landing on the shore, and
to be warned about our too hasty departure,
greatly distressed us. On the other hand, when we
saw that that people knew foreign
languages, and were endowed with such
humanity, it was no small consolation to us:
above all, the sign of the cross affixed to the instrument,
filled us with unique joy,
as a manifest omen of safety.
An answer was given by us in the Spanish language.
that our ship was in sufficiently good condition,
since we had experienced calms and contrary
winds rather than
storms: as for our sick men—

--- Page 713 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 9
...people, that they were very numerous, and indeed seriously
suffering, so that unless a descent to the
land were permitted to them, they would be in danger of their
lives. Other things, which we lacked, we particularly
showed, adding, that we had
a few goods, which if it pleased them to buy,
our necessities could be relieved,
lest we should be a burden to them. We offered to the servant
a small reward in ducats, and a parcel of crimson
silk, which was to be offered to the superior
minister; but he did not accept it,
indeed he scarcely deigned to look at it: and so, in
another small boat, which had been sent to him,
he departed.
      About three hours having elapsed, after
the servant received our answer, a boat
was rowed towards us, a man (as it seemed) from the Magistrates. He was dressed
in a toga with wide sleeves, of most beautiful
blue camelot, much more splendid than we have in Europe:
His inner tunic was green; and similarly
his hat, which was made in the
shape of a Turban, elegantly arranged,
nor too large, such as Turkish ones usually
are; and the locks of his hair
hung down below the edge of the Turban. A man
truly venerable in appearance. He was carried in
a boat, partly gilded, four
                                 a 5                      only-

--- Page 714 ---
10 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;FRANCIS BACON
accompanied by only men, in the same boat.
But another followed behind, in which there were about twenty men.
As soon as he had come within a spear's throw, we were warned by certain signs from the boat that we should send some of our men to him. This we did immediately, in our ship's skiff; sending the chief man among us (with one exception), and four with him. And when we were about six rods from the boat, they ordered us to stop and not to approach closer. Which we also did. Then indeed the man, whom I just described, stood up on his feet and asked in a loud voice in Spanish, "Are you Christians?" We replied that we were Christians: fearing less, because we had seen the sign of the Cross on that standard. To which reply, he raised his right hand towards Heaven, and then gently brought it to his mouth; which gesture is customary for them when they give thanks to God. Then he continued; "If you swear (each one of you) by the merits of the Savior, that you are not pirates, nor have shed human blood, whether by right or by force, within the space of the last forty days, you will obtain permission to land." We replied that we were all ready for that oath.
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp

--- Page 715 ---
Novus Atlas.                                     11
...to be provided. So, one of his retinue,
who seemed to be a Notary, put that into wri-
ting. This done, another from the retinue
of that chief man, who was being carried in the same
boat, after the Lord had spoken something into
his ear, said in a loud voice: "My Lord wishes
you to know this, that it is not from pride or
arrogance that he does not board your ship;
but because it is known from your Response
that many among you are unwell, he had been
warned by the health official in the city
to speak at some distance." We bowed our
heads and responded; that we were all his most
humble servants; and that we considered it a great
honor, and attributed it to his singular humanity,
what had already been done; but we hoped
that the illness with which our sick ones
suffer was by no means contagious. So
that chief man returned. A little later
the Notary came and boarded our ship;
holding in his hand a certain fruit of that
region, not unlike an Orange, but with a color
more inclining towards scarlet, which breathed a most
sweet odor. He carried it, (as it seemed), so that
it might serve him as an antidote against contagion.
However, he presented an oath to us: By
                                 a 6                         Jesus

--- Page 716 ---
12 &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;OF FRANCIS BACON
Jesus the Son of God, and His merits, and then
he told us that on the next day, before the Sun's
rising, someone would come who would summon us,
and lead us to the strangers' house,
where everything necessary would be ready for us,
whether for the sick or for the healthy.
Thus he departed from us: and when we offered him some gold coins,
he said, smiling: that he ought not to receive a double
salary for one service. The meaning of these words (as I
believe) was that he received his salary from the
public for his service. For
(as I afterwards understood) they call an officer who receives
rewards, a man of double salary.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The next morning, at dawn, that Minister approached us,
the one who first came to us with his rod;
and he reported: that he had come to lead us
to the strangers' house:
but that he had anticipated the hour, so that we might have
the convenience of a whole day for our affairs.
But if (he said) you will listen to me, first you will send
some of you with me, who may inspect the place,
and how it can best be accommodated for receiving you;
and afterwards you will summon your sick
and the rest whom you wish to descend to land.
We thanked him, and said that this care, which for
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;stran-

--- Page 717 ---
N O V U S A T L A S .        13
poor travelers, God would certainly reward. And so six of our men accompanied him. He led the way, and looking back at us, he said, very kindly indeed, that he was our servant only for our convenience, and a guide for the way. He led us through three streets, very beautiful indeed; and along the entire way which we traversed, not a few of the people gathered on both sides, standing in order; but in such a civil manner that they seemed not so much to have gathered for an idle spectacle, as to welcome our arrival. Many of them, as we walked along, opened their arms a little: a gesture which they use when they wish to signify that someone's arrival is pleasing to them. The travelers' house is a beautiful and spacious building, constructed of bricks, like ours, but a little more purple in color; with elegant windows, some of glass, but others of delicate linen cloth, dipped in oil. He led us first into a rather elegant upper room, located up some steps; then he asked us how many of us there were in number? And, how many of our men were sick? We replied: The total number, both of the healthy and of the sick, was about fifty-one men:
                                                                    ex

--- Page 718 ---
14 FRANCIS BACON
out of whom seventeen were sick.
He asked us to wait for a little while
until he returned to us. Which he did after
about an hour. Then indeed he led us
to see the rooms which had been prepared
for us, nineteen in number: a calcula-
tion having obviously been made (as it seemed)
that four of those rooms, which were some-
what superior to the others, should accommodate four of
our principal men, in which they should
sleep separately; and each of the remaining fifteen
should be assigned to two (people). The rooms
were elegant and bright, and also fur-
nished with sufficiently splendid furniture. Then finally
we turned into a long portico, such
as the dormitories of Monks usually are;
where he showed us, along one entire
side (for the opposite side was nothing else
than a wall and windows), seventeen
clean cells, having partitions
of Cedar. Which portico, with its cells, forty
in number (obviously many more
than we needed), had been established
for the use of the infirm. And at the same time he pointed out
that as soon as any of the sick
recovered, he could be transferred from a cell to a
room. For which use ten other
rooms had been prepared, besides those of which
we spoke before. This having been done, into the din-
                                              ing room

--- Page 719 ---
**NEW ATLANTIS. 15**
he led us back to the dining room, and raising his rod a little, (which was their custom, whenever Ministers report the commands of Superiors,) he spoke to us thus.
I make known to you, that the custom of this Kingdom requires, that after the present day, and tomorrow, (which we permit you for transferring men and your goods from the ship) you keep yourselves, within these doors, for three days.

However, let this not disturb you, nor on that account imagine yourselves to be confined within a prison:

but rather that this is an indulgence, by which you may refresh and restore your spirits from your journey, you will lack nothing:

Indeed, six servants have been assigned, who may serve you, and attend to your affairs.

We thanked him, with all affection, and humility: and said: God is undoubtedly manifested in this land.

We also offered him twenty gold pieces, but he also, smiling, said only this: What, do you want me to be a man of double salary? thus he departed.

A little later, our lunch was brought: which certainly provided a sufficiently lavish, and wholesome meal, both in respect to food, and drink: certainly better and more abundant, than according to the measure of any College, as far as I know, in Europe.

The drink was of three kinds of

--- Page 720 ---
16          OF FRANCIS BACON
kinds: each of them good
and wholesome: Wine from grapes: a drink from
grains, such as beer is with us, but
clear and limpid: and sicera, a kind made from
a certain fruit of that Region,
a drink indeed most pleasing, and of wonderful re-
freshment. Also brought to us was a great
quantity of those scarlet Oranges,
for the use of the sick: for they said that these
were a present and efficacious remedy against
the sickness contracted during the voyage.
Moreover, he handed us a box,
full of whitish or ash-colored pills:
and advised that our sick, each night, at the entrance
to bed, should take one of them: which he had said
would hasten their recovery.

The next day, when
we had rested from the labor and work concerning the transport of
men, and our belongings from the ship,
it seemed good to me to call our companions
together: and when they had assembled, I addressed
them thus: My dearest friends, let us know ourselves,
and in what state our affairs are. We are men,
cast upon the land from the sea, like Jonah from the belly
of the Whale, when we were as if buried in the deep.
Now indeed, although we again tread the earth,
nevertheless we stand midway between life and death.
For the boundaries, and the an-
                                                               cient,

--- Page 721 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 17
and of the new World, we have traversed. And whether it will be granted to us to see Europe again, is known to God alone. By some miracle we have been brought here, and it will be little short of a miracle if we are carried away from here. Therefore, recalling in our minds our past safety and present and future dangers, let us turn ourselves to God, let us lift up our hearts, and let each of us correct our ways.
Moreover, we have come to a Christian people, full of piety and humanity: let us take care (I beg you) lest we bring upon ourselves that shame, by openly displaying our vices or bad habits before them. Furthermore, there is more: for they, (even if under the guise of humanity) have confined us within the enclosures of this house for three days; who knows if they are doing this in order that they may test our character: if they find us depraved, they will immediately order us to be exiled; but if upright, they will grant us a longer stay here: For those servants whom they have assigned, why should they not also act as spies? Therefore, for the love of God, and if the good of our souls and bodies is dear to us, let us conduct ourselves in such a way that we may both have peace with God and find favor in the eyes of this people.
Our companions,

--- Page 722 ---
18 FRANCIS BACON'S
our companions, with one voice, thanked me for what I had admonished, and promised that they would live soberly and modestly, without even the slightest scandal. And so we spent those three days happily and free from cares, not at all worried about what might happen to us after those three days; during which period of days we were also constantly gladdened by the recovery of our sick companions. They considered themselves sent as if into some pool endowed with divine healing power, for indeed they were recovering so quickly.

On the morrow, after those three days had passed, a new man came to us, whom we had not seen before, clothed in a blue garment, just like the previous one, except that his Turban was white, with a small red cross on the top. He also had a liripipe around his neck, made of the purest linen. Upon his entrance, he bowed a little and spread his arms somewhat. But we greeted him back in a very humble and submissive manner, awaiting from his mouth a sentence, either of life or of death. He requested that he might speak with a few of our men. And so only six remained; the others withdrew. Then he [said]: I indeed of this house, pere-

--- Page 723 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 19
I am appointed over the office of strangers; but by calling a Christian Presbyter. And so I have now come to render my service to you in all things, as strangers, but especially as Christians. I have some things to relate to you, which (as I believe) you will not unwillingly hear. This state has given you permission to remain for six more weeks. And do not let it trouble you, if indeed your affairs require more time: for neither is the law of the Kingdom itself rigid in this regard; moreover, I have no doubt that I myself could procure for you an extension of that time, as your affairs may demand. Furthermore, I tell you that this house for strangers is, at this time, quite wealthy and well provided with ready money: for it has accumulated its revenues now for thirty-seven years: for so many have passed since any stranger arrived in these parts: therefore do not be anxious about your expenses; the costs, as long as you remain here, will be supplied from the public treasury: nor will even a moment of your stay be deducted on account of this. But as for the goods which you say you have brought, no harsh conditions will be imposed upon you, but just

[decorative printer's mark]

--- Page 724 ---
20 FRANCIS BACON
you will sell them at fair prices, receiving their value either in other goods, or in gold and silver: for it is of no concern to us. But if there is anything you wish to ask of this State, do not conceal it from us. For you will find that we will give such an answer that your countenance will not fall, nor be saddened. This much only I tell you, that none of you should go further than Karanna (which among them is equivalent to a mile and a half) from the city walls, without special license. We replied, after we had looked at each other in turn, admiring this gracious and as it were paternal kindness, that we had nothing to say, since words failed for giving thanks, and his most noble and unexpected munificence had anticipated all things that we might have needed to ask. We certainly entertained that thought, as if we had before our eyes an image of eternal Salvation in the Heavens: since we, who a little while ago were placed in the jaws of death, had now been brought into a place where perpetual consolations, and nothing else, breathe. As for the command imposed upon us, we would render the utmost obedience, even if it could not be otherwise than that our hearts, with the most ardent [longing for] that holy and happy land further

--- Page 725 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 21

ther, should be inflamed.
We added that our tongues would sooner cleave to our throats than we would omit mention, either of his venerable person or of this entire nation, in our prayers. We also implored him to count us among the number of his truly deserving and faithful servants, by no less right than that by which mortals have ever been bound to mortals; and so we humbly cast ourselves and all that was ours at his feet. He said that he was a Priest and expected a Priest's reward: that is, our brotherly love, and the good of our souls and bodies. So he departed from us, not without tears welling up from tenderness of spirit; and he left us also confused and overwhelmed with joy and a feeling of gratitude, and we said to one another that we had come into a land of Angels, who appeared to us daily and anticipated us with consolations which we could not even have imagined, much less expected.

On the next day, about the tenth hour of the morning, the Governor again visited us; and after greetings had been exchanged on both sides, he said familiarly that he had come to visit us and spend time with us.

--- Page 726 ---
22          FRANCIS BACON
spend time with us. Then he asked for a chair and sat down. But we, ten in number (for the others were either inferior or had gone outside), sat around him; and then he began thus. Concerning this Island Bensalem (for so they call it in their language), we have this to say: that on account of the solitary situation of our Island, and the laws imposed on those traveling from us concerning the concealment of this land, and the rare admission of foreigners into our region, indeed the greatest part of the habitable World is known to us, but we ourselves are utterly unknown to others. Therefore, since Questions are more suitable for those who know less, it is more fitting that you question me, rather than I you. We responded: That we returned him the greatest thanks, since he granted us this permission; then from those things which we had already observed, we could easily conjecture that there was no thing in worldly matters more worthy of knowledge than the state and condition of this most fortunate land. But before all things (we said), since we have now come from the farthest shores of the earth, and also hope to meet someday in the Heavenly Kingdom (because we are Christians on both sides), we desire to know, since this land is so greatly distant, and by vast and unknown sea tracts—

--- Page 727 ---
NEW ATLAS. 23
regions, divided from that land in which
our Savior, while he was in the flesh,
dwelled: Who then was the Apostle of this
people, and by what means was it converted
to the Faith? It was easy to perceive from
his countenance that this question of ours
had been especially pleasing to him: "My heart,"
(he said) "you have wonderfully attracted to
yourselves, because you propose this question
in the first place: For it indicates that you
seek first the Kingdom of God: And willingly,
and briefly, I will satisfy this request of yours."

About twenty years after the Ascension
of the Lord, it happened that there was seen
by the people of Renfusa, (a maritime city
situated on the eastern side of our Region,)
by night, (the night, however, was cloudy, but
calm,) about a thousand paces from the shore, a
very tall column of Light: not in a pyramidal
shape, but like a cylinder, erected from the sea
towards the sky, and on its summit a large Cross
of Light, somewhat more splendid than the body
of the column. At this so wonderful spectacle,
the people of the city gathered (as is customary)
upon the sands of the sea, and stood for a little
while astonished: But a little later very many
entrusted themselves to small boats, so that they
might inspect more closely a matter of such wonder.
But

--- Page 728 ---
24 OF FRANCIS BACON
But, after the boats had arrived within about sixty paces of the column, behold, all suddenly stopped, nor could they proceed further: yet so, that they were allowed to move in a circle, but not to approach closer: to such an extent that the boats stood as if in a theatre, about to behold this light as a celestial stage.

It happened however by chance, that in one of the boats there was someone from our Sages, namely, of the society of Solomon's House:

Which House or College, (my dearest brothers,) is plainly the eye of this Kingdom. He, after for some time, had contemplated this column, together with the Cross, attentively and devoutly, prostrated himself on his face, and then raising himself to his knees, and lifting his hands to Heaven, poured forth prayers of this kind.

     *O Lord God of Heaven and earth; by*
*your special grace, you have deigned for*
*the men of our Order to know your works*
*of creation, and their secrets; and to*
*discern, (as much as is given to generations*
*of men,) among divine miracles, works*
*of nature, effects of art, and illusions*
*of demons, with impostures—*

--- Page 729 ---
N O V U S A T L A S. 25
...of impostures. I acknowledge and testify before
this people, that this thing which we behold before our
eyes, is Thy Finger, and a True Miracle. But since
we have learned from our Books, that Miracles are never
wrought by Thee, except for some Divine and excellent
Purpose, (for the Laws of Nature are Thy Laws, from
which Thou dost never depart save for a great Cause;)
we most humbly beseech Thee, to prosper this great sign
for us, and to grant its Interpretation and use in Mercy;
which, by sending the same to us, Thou dost silently and
secretly promise.

  After he had thus prayed, immediately he felt the
Boat, in which he was being carried, freed and movable,
while the others remained as if still bound. Interpreting
this as a certain sign of permission to approach, he caused
the boat to be propelled gently and silently, by rowing,
towards the Column. But before he had reached it, the
Column with the Cross of light dissipated, and spread
itself on all sides as if into a firmament
          b                    which-

--- Page 730 ---
26 OF FRANCIS BACON
which turned into a certain multitude of stars: Which also themselves soon vanished: nor did anything else remain to be seen, except a certain small ark of cedar, dry indeed, and not at all wetted by water, although it floated. But in its front part, facing the Wise Man, a palm branch, small indeed and green, was growing. He, after he had received the ark into his boat with great veneration, behold the ark spontaneously opened itself, in which were found, a Book and an Epistle: each written on pure parchment, and wrapped in linen cloths. The Book contained all the canonical books of the Old and New Testaments, just as you have them, (for we know well which books the churches among you receive;) and the Apocalypse itself, and some other writings from the New Testament, which had not been published at that time, were nevertheless contained in that book. As for the epistle, it was written in these words.

   _I Bartholomew, Servant of the Most High, and Apostle of Jesus Christ, was admonished by an Angel, who appeared to me in a vision of Glory, that this Ark to the waves of the sea_

--- Page 731 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 27
commit to the waves. Therefore I testify, and
announce, to that people, to whom God shall have
ordained this Ark to arrive; that on that
very day there will come to them, Salvation, and Peace,
and good Will, from the Father,
and the Lord Jesus.

Moreover, in these two writings, both the
Book and the Epistle, God worked a remarkable
miracle, not unlike that which He showed to the Apostles
(by the original gift of tongues). For, since at that time,
in this land, there lived Hebrews, Persians, and
Indians, besides the natives themselves, each one read in that
Book and Epistle, as if they had been written in
his own proper Language. In this way, (my brothers,)
this land was preserved from infidelity (just as
the remnants of the old world were preserved
from the waters,) by the Ark, through the help of the Apostolic and
miraculous Evangelization of Saint Bar-
tholomew. And here he ceased speaking. When
a certain messenger came, who summoned him.
And so nothing else intervened in that conversation.

On the following day, immediately after lunch, the
Governor again came to us; and excused
himself, saying that he had suddenly and
        b 2        unex-

[Bottom right corner contains handwritten or stamped marks: -6a-, -o o-, -23-]

--- Page 732 ---
28 FRANCISCI BACONI
unexpectedly called away, but had now returned to make amends for that, and to spend time with us, if only his company or conversation should be agreeable to us. We replied that, indeed, it was so agreeable to us that we would be unmindful of neither past miseries nor future dangers, as long as we enjoyed his conversation. We added that we considered one hour spent in conversing with him to be better than whole years of our former life. He bowed slightly, and after we had sat down, he said, "Very well, your questions are ready." Then one of our company, after a short delay, spoke thus: that there was a certain matter concerning which we were indeed eager to know, but fearful of asking, lest perhaps we should seem to have presumed too much. Nevertheless, emboldened by his singular kindness towards us (since we scarcely consider ourselves as strangers, who are his most devoted and dedicated servants), we would avail ourselves of the liberty of proposing it, most humbly entreating that if he would scarcely deign to answer, he would nevertheless pardon the question, even if he rejected it. He said that we had observed enough, and still held in memory, those words spoken by himself, regarding this happy land, in which we now set foot, paucis

--- Page 733 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 29

to be known to very few, and yet to know most nations of the world well enough: which we clearly perceived to be true, since they were skilled in the languages of Europe, and understood our affairs in many respects, while we, on the contrary, in Europe, after so many and so remote voyages undertaken in this last age, had heard absolutely nothing about this Island. We could not wonder enough at this, since all nations become known to one another either through travels into foreign parts, or through the arrival of foreigners to them. Although, he who travels in a foreign nation may acquire more knowledge and information by sight than one remaining at home can learn from a traveler by hearing alone, nevertheless, in either way, mutual knowledge can be had, to some extent. But as for this island, no news was ever brought to us concerning the arrival of any ship from it to our shores, much less to the shores of Europe, nor to the shores of the Indies, Western or Eastern; nor have we received anything concerning any ship, of whatever people it may be, that has returned from this land. However, that which moves our wonder does not consist in this, for its location (as your Lordship had said) in so vast a
        *b 3*                                     sea

[Bottom right corner contains small stamped or handwritten numbers and a decorative symbol: 25, a cross-like emblem in a square frame, 52]

--- Page 734 ---
FRANCIS BACON'S
of the ocean's secret chamber, could be the cause of this; but that they, on the contrary, should have
knowledge of the languages, books, and affairs
of peoples so immensely distant from them,
that surpasses all admiration, nor can it in
any way come into our minds how this
could be done: for to us indeed it seems the
condition of Divine Minds and Powers, but not of
any men, that they themselves lie
hidden and invisible, while others meanwhile
are open to their sight, and as if placed in
the open. At these words, the Governor
gently smiled, and said: "Not without
cause do you ask pardon for this question,
since you imply, as if you considered this land
no other than the land of Magicians,
which would send forth aerial spirits in all
directions: by whose aid and service,
whatever was happening in other regions,
it would perfectly know." All with one voice humbly
replied, with a countenance however so
composed that we showed him to have spoken
this not otherwise than in jest: that we indeed
easily came to that thought, that there was
something in this nation plainly supernatural;
that, however, we considered rather Angelic
than Magical: but clearly to his Lordship we would speak,

--- Page 735 ---
N O V U S A T L A S.        31
-mur, what that thing finally was, which had cast this scruple upon us, lest we should inquire; that we had understood nothing from this matter, but since in a previous conversation we remembered him to have hinted that this nation had, by laws, provided for silence towards strangers. To this he replied: "Indeed you remembered correctly: and so, among those things which I intend to present before you, some must be reserved, which it is not at all permitted to reveal; however, not a few will remain, which will abundantly provide you with satisfaction.
    Therefore you will understand (that which perhaps will seem scarcely credible to you), that about three thousand years ago, or a little more, the navigations of the world (especially to remote regions) were greater and more vigorously undertaken than on the present day. Do not think that I am unaware of how much navigations have grown among you within the last one hundred and twenty years: this is sufficiently known to me. And yet, they were greater (I say) at that time than now. Whether that preservation of the remnants of the human race by the Ark from the universal Flood instilled this confidence in navigation in men, or whether something else was the cause. But however that may be, what I say is true. The Phoenicians, and espe-
            b 4             -cially

--- Page 736 ---
32          FRANCIS BACON
especially the Tyrians, had large fleets.
Similarly, the Carthaginians also had [fleets],
their Colony, although it was situated
more to the West. But from the East, the
fleets of the Egyptians and of Palestine
were powerful and numerous. China, however, and the Great
Atlantis (which you call America),
which now have only Junks and Canoes,
abounded greatly in those days with larger ships.
This island of ours (as is clearly evident
from the reliable histories of that age)
was then equipped with fifteen hundred ships,
and these were strong and of great capacity.
Of this, which I speak of, among you there is
very little or no memory, but it is known
to us for certain.
   At that time also, ships and vessels
of all those nations which I just named
arrived at this island.
And, as usually happens, those ships,
besides their own people, carried many
from other regions which were not themselves
maritime; such as Persians, Chaldeans,
Arabs, so that almost all powerful
and famous nations visited this place:
from whom we have some lineages and
tribes even to this very day. But as
for our ships, into all
                                                                 pro-

--- Page 737 ---
        THE NEW ATLAS.          33
almost to all shores, both to
your strait, which you call the Pillars of Her-
cules, and to other regions, both of the Me-
diterranean and of the Atlantic Sea:
such as to Paguinum (a very ancient city in
China), which is the same as
Cambalu, and Quinze, situated on the Eastern
sea, not far from the borders of Eastern Tarta-
ry.
  Moreover, at the same time, and for a
whole century following, or more, the peo-
ples of the great Atlantis were very
powerful. For although the narration and description, made by
a great man of your World (namely,
that the progeny of Neptune had fixed their seats there,
then concerning the magnificent Temple, Palace, city,
and hill, and indeed concerning the multiple spirals
of beautiful and great rivers, which (like
so many necklaces) encircled that Tem-
ple and City; and finally concerning
those remarkable steps of ascent by which one arrived at them,
just as through

--- Page 738 ---
34          FRANCIS BACON'S
So powerful (I say) were they, that at the same
time (or at least within the space of ten
years) they undertook two great naval
expeditions: these, namely, from Ti-
rambel, through the Atlantic Sea, as far as
the Mediterranean Sea; while those from Coya
through the Southern Sea, as far as this
island of ours. Concerning the former expedi-
tion, moreover, your author seems to have
drawn something from the Egyptian priest whom
he cites. For certainly such an expedition
took place. But whether those ancient Athenians
were the ones who repelled and
routed those forces, and whether this glory is to be
attributed to them, I cannot say: this is beyond
all doubt, that neither ship
nor man ever returned from that expedition,
nor would that fleet of Coya, which invaded
us, have fared better, had it not
fallen in with more merciful enemies. For
the King of this island (named Altabin), a man
prudent and an excellent commander in war,
to whom both the enemy's forces and his own were
sufficiently known, managed the affair so that
he cut off their land forces, after they had
disembarked, from their fleet, and as if with a net
encircled both forces, with a larger army
than theirs, both land and naval,
                                                                 thus-

--- Page 739 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 35
and thus compelled them to surrender, without battle; and when they were in his power, he imposed no harsher conditions than by demanding an oath from them, that they would never in the future bear arms against him; which done, he dismissed them all unharmed. Nevertheless, divine vengeance, not much later, avenged those proud attempts, inasmuch as, within the course of a hundred years, or less, that great Atlantis was entirely lost and destroyed, not swallowed by an earthquake, as that man of yours affirms. (For indeed that whole region is little subject to earthquakes,) but by a particular deluge, or flood: inasmuch as even to this day, those regions have larger rivers, and also higher mountains, which pour waters into the plains, than any other part of the old World. But this is true, that that inundation was not deep, perhaps no more, in many places, than forty feet, whence it happened, that although it submerged men and beasts everywhere, nevertheless wild [animals] inhabit

--- Page 740 ---
35 OF FRANCIS BACON
in which places, they had buildings, higher
than where the waters could reach; yet that inun-
dation, although by no means deep,
was long-lasting. Hence, those who lived in the valley,
because of the scarcity of food, and of other
necessary things, perished from hunger and want.
Therefore, do not wonder if America's inhabi-
tants are so sparse, nor if its people
are so simple and barbarous.
For you ought to reason thus;
that the American people are new, and
recent (I say) compared to the other inhabitants
of the world, by no less than a thousand years.
For so much time had elapsed, between
the universal deluge, and that particular one
of America. Indeed, those thin and rare
remnants of the human race, which had remained in the mountains,
slowly produced offspring in the lower parts
of the region; and since they were wild men,
and rude in all things, (by no means similar
to Noah and his sons, who were a family
chosen from the whole world,) they were not
sufficient to transmit letters, arts, and the cultivation
of life to their descendants. And moreover, since in their mountain
dwellings, (because of the extremely harsh cold
of those regions, with the skins
of bears, tigers, and large and shaggy goats,
which in those parts aboun-

--- Page 741 ---
N O V U S A T L A S. 37
abound, had been accustomed to clothe themselves, but
afterwards, descending into the valley, they could not
bear the intolerable heat there, nor was any
supply of lighter clothing available to them,
they were compelled to introduce the custom of going naked,
which among them, even to this day, is in use.
They are seized only with great pleasure and desire
for wearing bird feathers; and this, without a doubt,
they derived from the tradition and example of their
ancestors, who lived in the mountains; who perhaps
were attracted to this custom by the innumerable
multitude of birds seeking the heights, when the lowlands
were stagnant with water. You see, (brothers), that by
this greater event, and a kind of miracle of time,
our commerce with the Americans has ceased, since
they themselves no longer existed: with whom, above all
mortals, we previously had commerce, as being
closest to our region. As for other parts of the world,
it is most evident that in succeeding centuries, whether
because of wars waged, or from the cycle and vicissitude
of times, navigations everywhere have greatly declined:
but especially long-distance navigations; because
triremes, and such ships, which could barely tolerate
the Ocean, came into
                                  use

--- Page 742 ---
FRANCIS BACON
began to come into use. From this, therefore, you
clearly perceive for what reason that knowledge of our region,
which could be acquired by navigators coming to us,
failed many centuries ago;
unless perhaps by a rare occurrence such a landing
happened, just as yours a few days ago. Now indeed,
concerning the cessation of our navigation to other parts,
it is necessary to assign to you another cause. For I
cannot deny (if I wish to speak the truth) that our
naval apparatus and equipment, in the number and strength of ships,
abundance of sailors, skill of helmsmen,
and all other things whatsoever, is as strong
today as it once was. Therefore, what the matter is,
that we now stay at home, I will declare to you
separately: and this will approach more closely
to elucidating your question, which you proposed at the beginning.
    There reigned in this Island, nineteen hundred
years ago, a King, whose memory, above
all others, we especially cultivate and venerate:
not superstitiously, but as a certain divine instrument,
though a mortal man. His name was Solamona.
And him we consider as the lawgiver of this nation.
To this King God gave a broad heart, and inscrutable
in goodness: who entirely devoted himself to this, that the kingdom, and the peo-
                                                              ple

--- Page 743 ---
NEW ATLANTIS. 39
...his people happy. Therefore, when he reflected on how sufficient and (so to speak) self-sustaining this land had been on its own, capable of supporting itself without the resources or supplies of foreigners—seeing that it contained, more or less, five thousand six hundred miles in circumference, and was for the most part exceedingly fertile and excelled in the goodness of its soil. And again, considering that the kingdom's fleet and ships could be actively employed and exercised, both for transport and carriage from port to port, and for voyages to certain adjacent islands subject to this empire and its laws. Then, indeed, recalling how happy and flourishing the state of this kingdom had been at that time, so that it could be changed in a thousand ways for the worse, but scarcely in any way for the better, he thought nothing at all was lacking to achieve his noble and truly heroic aims, except that (as far as human providence could achieve) he should make perpetual those things which in his time had been so happily founded and established. Wherefore, among his other fundamental laws, he enacted many laws concerning the prohibition of the entry of foreigners; which at that time (although after the American calamity) was quite frequent: by this institution,

--- Page 744 ---
40 OF FRANCIS BACON
stitution, because he feared novelties and mixtures
of customs. It is true that a similar prohi-
bition concerning the entry of foreigners, by an old decree
among the Chinese, was in force, and even
now is in force. But there the matter is contempti-
ble, and it has rendered them a curious,
unskilled, timid, and inept people. But our le-
gislator, in establishing his law, adopted a very
different temperament. For first, he preserved all rights of humanity
intact, in his institutions and founda-
tions, for the relief and comfort of afflicted
strangers; which you also have ex-
perienced. At which statement, as was fitting,
we all rose together, and bowed our-
selves. He continued. The same King, desiring
to join political counsels to acts of humanity:
and thinking it by no means fitting for humanity
that foreigners should be detained against their will,
nor less unfitting for reasons of state
that they should mock and divulge the secrets of this island,
entered upon this path. He established

--- Page 745 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 41
record we have, not even of a single
ship that returned; and of only thirteen
men at different times, who chose to
return in our ships. But what those few
who thus returned revealed about this region, escapes
us. But you can easily imagine that
whatever they reported was considered no otherwise than as a kind of
dream. But our navigations to foreign
parts, it seemed good to our legislator, to completely
restrain. In China this is not done. For the Chi-
nese navigate wherever they wish and can.
Which sufficiently shows that their law, concerning
the exclusion of foreigners, proceeds from pusillanimity alone, and
fear. But this prohibition of ours
receives only one restriction:
and that certainly an admirable one: For the good
which can be drawn from communication with
foreigners, it preserves, but evil
it avoids. I will now reveal this to you. And
here I shall seem for a while to digress from that which
is being discussed: but soon you will perceive this very thing to pertain
to the matter. Therefore you will understand (my dearest
friends) that among the deeds of that
king, one thing especially stands out. That is,
the founding or institution of a certain order
and Society, which we call the House of Solomon.
I say a most noble one (how
                                                                much

--- Page 746 ---
42          FRANCIS BACON
(as great as we think,) of all, through-
out the world, the foundation, and a great
light of this kingdom. This House is
dedicated to studies and contemplations
of the works and creatures of God. Some
think it drew its name from the founder,
a little corrupted: as if it ought to be
called Solomon's House: but the authentic
archives themselves have it written thus,
as it is now pronounced in everyday speech.
Therefore, I think the name flowed from
that King of the Hebrews, who is famous
among you, but not unknown to us, for
we have some portions of his works which
are lacking among you. I mean that Natural
History, which he wrote about all Plants,
from the Cedar of Lebanon, even to the
Hyssop, which grows out of the wall, and
about all things in which there is life and
motion. Hence the thought came to my
mind, that our king, since he felt himself
to agree in many things with that king of
the Hebrews (who had lived many years
before him), honored this foundation by
his title. And into this opinion I am espe-
cially led, because in very ancient histories
I find this Society sometimes called the
House of Salomon, but sometimes the Col-
lege of the Works of six days.

--- Page 747 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 43
of days. Therefore I am persuaded that that excellent king of ours learned from the Hebrews that God created this World, and all things that are in it, in the space of six days, and therefore, when he founded that house for the inquiry and discovery of the true and inner nature of all things, so that God the creator might receive greater glory on account of their making, and men might perceive a more abundant fruit in their use, he also gave it that other name, namely, the College of the Six Days' Works. But, to return at last to the matter at hand. After the king had forbidden all navigation to his subjects, except to parts subject to this empire, he nevertheless sanctioned this ordinance: namely, that every twelve years two ships should be sent from this kingdom to different parts of the world; in each of these ships, three from the Brotherhood of Solomon's House were to be carried separately; it was to be given to them in command that they should inform us about the affairs and state of those places to which they might arrive, but especially about the sciences, arts, manufactures, and inventions of the whole world, and that, on their return, they should bring to us books, instruments, and models of every kind:
                                                                  navi-

--- Page 748 ---
FRANCIS BACON
...that the ships, after they had landed the brothers, were to return, but the brothers were to remain abroad until a new mission: these ships were not to be equipped with other merchandise than a good supply of provisions, and also a sufficiently large quantity of treasure, for the use of the brothers, for buying those things and remunerating such men as might be needed. But now, that I might set forth to you the ways by which the common sailors are restrained, lest in the lands to which they land, they be recognized: or by what ways, landed on shore, they might lie hidden under the name of other nations: or to what places our navigations are designated: or what places are again appointed for new missions, and other circumstances of this kind, which pertain to the practical part itself, it is not lawful for me to speak forth: nor certainly will it contribute much to your question.

Thus therefore you see, that we have instituted commerce: not for gold, silver, and gems, not for silks, or spices, nor for any other crude things, but only for God's first creature, namely light: light, I say, breaking forth and germinating in whatever region of the earth.

When he had said these things, he fell silent: we also ali-

--- Page 749 ---
NEW ATLANTIS. 45
For some time we were silent. For truly we were all astonished, when we heard such wonderful things recounted with such credible speech. But he, perceiving our minds heavy with certain thoughts, yet not ripe for birth, very courteously relieved us; and turned to questions about our journey and our fortunes: but towards the end he said, that we would do well if we entered into a consultation among ourselves, concerning the time to be requested from the state for our stay. In which matter he bade us not to be at all bashful: for whatever time it might seem good to us to ask for, he himself did not doubt that he would grant it: at which remark we all rose, and humbly began to kiss the hem of his Liripipe. But he refused, and immediately departed from us. But after it was spread among our men, that that state was accustomed to grant conditions to foreigners who wished to remain, we could scarcely persuade any of them to attend to our ship, or to prevent them from going immediately to the governor to ask for conditions. But, not without great difficulty, we at last restrained them, until we should decide by common consent what was to be done.
  Now however, we considered ourselves as free,

--- Page 750 ---
46 OF FRANCIS BACON
we were, when all fear of extreme ruin,
we saw removed. Most pleasantly also
we lived: walking through the city itself, and also that sub-
urb, which had been granted to us: in which, whatever
was worthy of sight, or pleasing, we sought out
and observed. Meanwhile, we contracted a familiarity
with many from the city, and those not
of the lower rank: among
whom, we perceived such great humanity,
and indeed a custom so pleasant and
free, of embracing and cherishing strangers as if in their bosom;
so that it was almost the case that
it brought forgetfulness to us of all those things, which
in our native lands had previously been dear.
Indeed, and daily we encountered, things
most worthy of observation and narration. Certainly,
if anywhere on earth there is a mirror, which ought to attract
and detain the eyes of men,
this region exhibits it. It happened one day,
that two of our company were invited to
a certain feast (which they call) of the family.
The custom, however, of celebrating that feast, might justly
be considered, most pious, drawn from the very
law of nature, and worthy of veneration:
showing undoubtedly that nation
to be filled with all Goodness.
Which is such: It is granted, by the laws
of the kingdom, to anyone, to whom it has happened to live, while
                                        thirty

--- Page 751 ---
N O V U S A T L A S. 47
born from his body, at the same time
surviving, he has seen; and all of them having passed their third
year of age; to celebrate this feast. Which is done at public expense. The fa-
ther of the family (whom they call Tirsanus), two
days before the feast, summons three of his friends, whom
he pleases to choose, to himself, and moreover, is honored by
the presence of the Magistrate of the city or town
where the feast is celebrated: but all members of the family of both
sexes are ordered to be present. During these
two days, Tirsanus, with those friends of his, and
the Magistrate, begins a consultation concerning the good of the family.
Then if any discords
or disputes have arisen in the family, they are ter-
minated and settled. Then if any of the
family have been reduced to poverty,
or afflicted in any way, a plan is initiated for relieving
them and supplying them with necessary sustenance.
Then if any of them
are addicted to vices, or lead an idle and depraved kind of life,
they are reprimanded and undergo censure.
Moreover, concerning marriages,
and the most suitable condition of life for any of them,
counsel is then taken; and other similar matters are discussed and de-
cided. The Magistrate therefore attends, so that he may fortify with his
authority the decrees and commands of Tirsanus, should anyone perchance from
the family not obey,

--- Page 752 ---
48      FRANCIS BACON
strengthen, and commit to execution: although this is
very rarely required, so great, indeed,
is their obedience to the order of nature,
then also the Tirsan chooses one of his sons,
who lives with him, in his house,
perpetually; who is thenceforth called the son
of the vine. The reason for the name will become clear later. On the day
of the festival, after the divine Liturgy has been celebrated,
the Tirsan proceeds into a certain spacious
hall, where the solemnities of the festival are performed:
which hall has a single step of ascent
at its upper end. There, against the wall, in
the middle, a chair is placed, with a table,
and a covering upon it: above the chair
a canopy is extended, round,
or oval, made of ivy; ivy certainly, compared
to ours, very much whitish in color, not
unlike the leaf of the poplar which we call 'silver':
but somewhat more splendid: for it remains green throughout winter. The canopy, more-
over, with silver threads, and fine linen, of various
colors, which bind the ivy together,
is elegantly woven; and the handiwork
is usually that of one of the daughters of the family:
at the top, it is veiled with a fine net, of fine linen and silver:
but the material of the canopy is real ivy:
from which, after the solemnity is finished, the friends
of the family love to pluck some leaf,
or a small branch.

--- Page 753 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 49
they love to pluck. The Tirsanus proceeds, accompanied by all his offspring, the males going before, the females following from behind. But if it be the mother of the family who bore all the offspring, there is placed at the right side of the chair a certain covered gallery with a secret door and windows, where she secretly sits. After the Tirsanus has entered, he sits down in that chair, the entire family, having ascended the step, positions itself next to the wall, both at the back and at the sides of the hall, standing on their feet, according to age, without distinction of sex. When he has sat down, (the hall in the meantime being filled with no small crowd, but without tumult or noise,) after some delay, there enters from the lower part of the hall, the Taratannus, (which word among them means, herald;) whose sides two youths attend; one of whom carries a scroll made of that shining yellow membrane, the other, a golden cluster of grapes with a long stem or stalk. The herald, and each youth, are clothed in silken cloaks of sea-green color; but the herald's cloak has golden rays, and is let down so much that it sweeps the ground somewhat. The herald, bowing himself slightly three times, approa-
ches

--- Page 754 ---
50      FRANCIS BACON'S
he approaches up to the raised platform, and there first
he takes the scroll in his hand. This scroll
is a royal charter, and contains gifts of revenues, many
privileges, exemptions, and
honorary distinctions, granted to the father of the family:
it is always inscribed, "To So-and-so, our
beloved Friend, and Creditor": which title is bestowed by the king
only in this case. For they say
that the king is indebted to no one, except for
the propagation of his subjects. The seal affixed to this
charter is the king's effigy, engraved in gold:
and although charters of this kind are issued
by virtue of office, and as if by right,
they are nevertheless varied at discretion, according to the number
and dignity of the family.
The Herald reads this charter aloud;
and while it is being read, Tirsanus rises to his feet,
supported by two of his sons, whom
he has chosen. Then the Herald
ascends the platform, and hands the charter to Tirsanus:
when this is done, a great acclamation is made by all
who are present, in their own language,
which means this: "Happy are
the people of Bensalem." Then the Herald receives
from the other youth the cluster of grapes,
which (as we said) is golden, both
the stem and the grapes themselves, but the grapes are elegantly
                                  colored-

--- Page 755 ---
NOVUS ATLAS.                                     51
are colored, and, if the males from the family
outnumber the females, the grapes are purple,
with a small sun placed at the top;
but if the females outnumber the males, the grapes are green, with
a crescent moon at the top. The grapes, moreover,
equal the number of children in the family. This
golden cluster is also handed by Haraldus
to Tirianus; who immediately hands the same to that son,
whom he had previously chosen to remain with him in the house:
but he perpetually carries it before his father, whenever he goes forth
into public, as a badge of honor:
and from this he receives the name (as has been said), son of the vine.
This solemnity having been completed, Tirianus
withdraws, and after some delay
having been interposed, he again goes forth to dinner,
where he sits alone under a canopy,
nor is it permitted for any of his children, of whatever
degree or dignity, to sit with him:
unless perchance he be from the house of Solomon. The service
of the table is performed by the males of the family,
who do this, whenever something is to be given to him,
kneeling down: the females, however,
merely stand around near the wall. The part
of the hall, which is below the step, has tables
placed on both sides, for the guests, to whom
it is served very decorously, and in good order:
but towards the end of the meal, (which
                      C 2                                  at

--- Page 756 ---
52 FRANCIS BACON
among them, in their greatest solemnities,
(which does not last beyond an hour and a half,) a hymn is sung,
varied according to the composer's genius,
(for they have excellent Poets,) but its subject
is perpetually the praises of
Adam, Noah, and Abraham: of whom
the first two were the parents of the entire human
race, the third, the father of the faithful.
It is always concluded, however, with an act of thanksgiving,
on account of the nativity of our Savior:
in whom the generations of the entire earth
obtain blessing. The meal finished, Tirsen again withdraws:
and alone he is led away into an inner place,
where he pours forth secret prayers: then he proceeds
a third time, to impart his blessing to all
his children, who surround him, as before.
Then he calls them by name, to himself, one by one,
as it pleases him, although the order of age is rarely changed.
The person who is called, (the table having been removed first,)
immediately kneels, before the chair:
but the father places his hands on their head,
and blesses them in these words: son of Bensalem,
(or daughter of Bensalem,) your father says: He,
through whom you drew vital breath, speaks the word:
the blessings of the eternal father, the prince of peace, and
                                        colum-

--- Page 757 ---
Novus Atlas.             53
holy doves, descend upon you,
and may the days of your pilgrimage be many and good. This blessing he bestows individually. But if any of the male children shall have excelled in virtue and merits (provided they do not exceed the number of two), after the general blessing, he calls them aside: and extending his hands over their shoulders as they stand, he thus says: Son, it is well that you were born, give glory to God, and persevere to the end. And at the same time he hands him a jewel, formed in the shape of an ear of wheat, which he always afterwards wears on the front of his Turban or Hat. This having been done, they prepare themselves for music and dancing, and other festivities of that kind, customary among them, for the rest of the day. And this is the way of celebrating that feast.
  Within a few following days, I formed a friendship and familiarity with a certain merchant of that city, whose name was Joabin. He was

--- Page 758 ---
54      FRANCIS BACON'S

views and customs, were widely different. For
while other Jews hold the name of Christ in hatred,
and foster a secret and inveterate malice against the
people among whom they live, these (Jews), on the contrary,
render many sublime attributes to our Savior,
and love the nation of Bensalem most ardently.
Indeed, that man, of whom I speak, was always
accustomed to confess that Christ was born of a virgin,
and had existed as greater than a mere man: then
he was accustomed to relate that God had placed him
over the Seraphim who attend his Throne: he also
sometimes called him the Milky Way, sometimes
the Elijah of the Messiah, and distinguished him
with many other great names. All these things,
although they are far inferior to the divine majesty
of Christ, yet they differ much from the style
of other Jews. Moreover, he made no end of
praising the region of Bensalem; indeed, he even
wanted it to be believed, from the tradition of certain
Jews living there, that the people of Bensalem were
from the stock of Abraham, through another son,
whom he calls Nachor: indeed, that Moses, through
a certain secret Cabala, had established those laws
which the people of Bensalem use today: and that
at the coming of the Messiah,

--- Page 759 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 55
...at the coming of the Messiah, it was fixed that when he is to appear in Jerusalem, on his throne, the king of Ben Salem would sit at his feet, with other kings removed to a long distance. Nevertheless, if you set aside these Jewish fantasies, he was a very prudent and learned man, and of profound counsel; and one who was exceedingly knowledgeable of the laws and customs of that nation of Ben Salem. Among other conversations one day, I happened to say that I had been greatly delighted by that account, which I had received from some of our own people, concerning their custom in celebrating the festival they call the Family Festival; for I did not seem to myself to have ever heard of any solemnity in which nature presided so remarkably. But since the propagation of families proceeds from marital union, I desired to learn something from him, both concerning their laws and customs regarding marriages; and finally, whether polygamy was forbidden among them? Since nations, which so greatly desired the propagation of their population, usually tolerated polygamy. To these things he replied, "You certainly praise, not without cause, that excellent institution, the Family Festival. Moreover, it has been proven by experience among us, that those families,
C 4 which

--- Page 760 ---
56 FRANCIS BACON
which, having participated in the blessing of that feast, afterwards always flourished wonderfully. But just prick up your ears, and I will tell you what I know. You will understand that scarcely any nation under the sun is found so chaste as this one of Bensalem, nor so pure from every stain and pollution. I would plainly call her the Virgin of the world. I remember having read, in one of your European books, about a holy Hermit among you, who desired to see the spirit of fornication, and immediately a small, deformed, and foul Ethiopian appeared to him. But if he had desired to see the spirit of Bensalem's chastity, doubtless it would have appeared to him in the form of some beautiful and glorious Cherub. For nothing among mortals is beautiful or worthy of admiration compared to the most chaste souls of that nation. Therefore, I want you to know that there are no brothels among them, no public houses of prostitution, no hired prostitutes, nor anything of this kind. Indeed, they wonder not without a certain detestation that you in Europe tolerate such things. They say that you have dislodged marriage from its proper function; for marriages were instituted as a remedy for illicit concupiscence, but natural concupiscence is like a spur to marriage. But, with men

--- Page 761 ---
N E W A T L A S.          57
men a remedy, more welcome to their corrupted desires, is present, marriages are almost driven out. And so, one can see countless among you who do not take wives, but rather prefer an impure and lustful celibacy to the honorable yoke of matrimony. Furthermore, many who do take wives do so late, when both the flower and strength of youth have vanished. But if by chance they contract matrimony, what else is matrimony to them than mere commerce? In which kinship, or dowry, or reputation is sought, with some desire (but nevertheless as for an indifferent thing) for offspring; but by no means does that faithful nuptial union between man and woman, which was instituted in the beginning, come to mind. Nor can it even happen that for those who have so vilely consumed so great a part of their age and strength, children (our other part) are altogether held in esteem. Indeed, and during the bond of matrimony, is this matter turned for the better, as it should have been, if those excesses were tolerated only for the sake of necessity? By no means: but the same desires remain even after matrimony, to the disgrace and opprobrium of matrimony itself. For neither brothels
               c 5

--- Page 762 ---
58 FRANCISCI BACON'S
frequenting brothels, or harlot-like customs, are punished more in married men than in those leading a celibate life. But a propensity for new loves and the delight of harlot-like embraces (where sin has been turned into an art) renders marriage an insipid thing, and as it were a burden, or a kind of tribute. They hear that these things are defended by you, as being tolerated to avoid greater evils, such as adulteries, the defilement of virgins, unnatural lust, and similar things. But they judge this prudence to be perverse, and they call it the conditions of Lot; who, to exempt his guests from insult, offered his daughters. Indeed, they say further that from this little or no gain is made, since the same vices and depraved appetites still remain and abound; inasmuch as illicit lust becomes like a furnace, where, if you completely contain the flame, it is immediately extinguished; but if any outlet is given, it rages. But as for the loves of males, they do not even know of these by report; yet you will not find friendships, throughout the whole world, more faithful and inviolate. And, to speak in a word (as I also said before), I have not read anywhere that such great chastity flourishes as in this land.
                                  Indeed

--- Page 763 ---
NOVUS ATLAS.          59
Moreover, a saying is common among them, that he who is unchaste loses self-respect; but self-respect, according to God and religion, is the most powerful curb on all vices.
   When he had said these things, that excellent Jew was silent for a little while. And I, although more desirous of hearing than speaking, yet deeming it proper that while he paused for a little while, I should not immediately be silent, said only this: that I would use those words to him which the widow of Zarephath used to Elijah, namely, that he had come to call our sins to our remembrance, and that (which one must frankly confess) the righteousness of Bensalem abounds more than that of Europeans. At these words, he bowed slightly, and continued his discourse in this manner.
   They also have laws concerning marriage, indeed several most prudent and most honorable ones. They do not tolerate polygamy. They have ordained that neither marriages be celebrated, nor contracts for future marriages be made, unless after a month from the time when each first saw the other. Marriages made without the consent of parents they do not indeed hold as invalid, but they punish with loss of inheritance:
               c 6               cre-

--- Page 764 ---
60          FRANCIS BACON'S
for indeed they deprive the children of such
marriages of two-thirds of the inheritance. Indeed, in
a book of one of yours, concerning a certain
Imaginary Commonwealth, I read, where it is
permitted for those about to contract marriage to
see each other naked. This they do not approve. For
indeed they consider it an insult that someone,
after such intimate acquaintance, should be rejected:
nevertheless, on account of several secret defects in
men and women which might afterwards render
marriage unhappy, they use a more civilized custom:
near each town, they have two pools; which they call
the pools of Adam and Eve; where it is permitted
for one of the man's friends, and likewise for another
of the woman's friends, to watch them bathing
separately in the bath. And while we were conversing
in this manner, someone came, who seemed to be a
messenger, dressed in a painted and gilded tunic;
who addressed the Jew. Then he turned to me, and
said, forgive me, I beg you; I am summoned from
here without delay. The next morning, the Jew came
to me again, joyful, as it seemed, and said: a message
was brought yesterday to the governor of the city,
that within seven days one of the Fathers of Salomon's
House would come here. Twelve years have now
passed, since any of them
                                                            here

--- Page 765 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 61
we have seen here. His arrival will be solemn, the reason hidden. I will ensure that a convenient place is prepared for you and your companions, from where you can watch the solemnity of his entrance. I thanked him, and said that this news of his arrival was most pleasing to me.

      On the appointed day, the Father entered. He was a man of moderate stature and age, handsome in appearance, bearing a countenance as if compassionate. He was dressed in a gown of pure black cloth, with wide sleeves and a cape. His inner garment was of linen, certainly most elegant and whitest, reaching down to his feet, with a belt likewise white, of linen. He also wore a liripipe around his neck, of purest linen. He had sumptuous gloves, adorned with gems. Hyacinthine shoes of velvet. His neck was bare up to his shoulders. His hat was in the shape of a helmet, or a montera, as the Spanish call it: beneath which hung his curls, slightly curly, and arranged in a becoming manner. Their color was darkish, as was that of his beard, which was trimmed into a round shape. He was carried, however, in a splendid chair, without wheels, in the manner of a litter: by two horses, magnificently caparisoned, of blue velvet,

--- Page 766 ---
62          FRANCIS BACON
blue, interwoven with gold, supporting the chair at each end: together with two runners, at each side of the chair, with similar adornment. The chair was made of cedar, gilded, and adorned with crystal: except that the front part had squares of sapphires, interspersed with gold, but the back part had similar ones of emeralds of Peruvian color. Also in the middle of the top of the chair, there was a Sun, radiating gold: and on its front a small Cherub, with spread wings, also of gold. The covering of the chair was a cloth, made of golden threads, with blue silk. Fifty youths preceded the chair, in loose tunics, of white silk, reaching to mid-calf, and stockings also of white silk, but shoes of blue velvet and hats of the same, with elegant feathers of various colors, surrounding the hat, in the form of a cord. Immediately before the chair walked two men, with bare heads, dressed in white linen, reaching down to their ankles, and girt with shoes also of blue velvet: who carried, one a cross, the other a pastoral staff: neither of metal, but the cross of Xylobalm, the staff of cedar. No knights accompanied it, neither before nor behind the chair,

--- Page 767 ---
Novus Atlas. 63
chair, for this reason (I believe), that all tumult and noise might be avoided. After the chair followed the Magistrates and Fraternities of the city. He sat alone, upon a cushion of a somewhat rougher blue velvet: but under his feet he had a rug, likewise of silk, of various colors, similar indeed to a Persian one, but more elegant. His right hand, as he went, he raised bare, blessing the people, but in silence. The streets were so arranged that a wide path lay open, nowhere obstructed: nor (I believe) was a battle line ever in an army better arranged than the people, at that time, in the streets. Moreover, even within the windows themselves, the spectators stood not improperly, but each as if placed in his own order. The celebration having finished, the Jew said to me: "For several days now, I will be detained, so that I cannot be with you, as usual, and as I desire: because a duty has been entrusted to me by the prefect of the city, to serve this eminent man." Three days later, the Jew returned to me, and said: "You have arrived here under good omens: For the Father of Salomon's House has been informed of your stay in this city: and has commanded me to announce to you that he and the entire society

--- Page 768 ---
64 OF FRANCIS BACON
your company to his presence, and also, separately, to speak with one of you, whom you shall choose for this purpose. For this matter, he appointed the day after tomorrow. Moreover, since he intends to impart his blessing to you, he appointed the forenoon. On the day and at the hour appointed, we came: and I, by my companions, was deputed for that private conversation. We found him in a splendid chamber, furnished with shining tapestries, and carpeted, without any step of ascent to the chair where he was sitting. He was sitting upon a low throne, magnificently adorned, and above his head he had a canopy, of blue silk, elegantly interwoven with gold. The room was empty of people, except that on either side of the throne, for honor's sake, stood a servant, clad in white garments. His inner garment was similar to that in which we had seen him clad in the street. But instead of a Toga, he was clad in a cloak, with a hood, of very fine black cloth, fastened around his shoulders. Upon our entrance, as we had been instructed, we bowed ourselves humbly: and when we had approached near the throne, he rose to his feet, raising his right hand, from which the glove had been removed, in the manner

--- Page 769 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 65
while he was blessing: but we, each one,
bowing low, kissed the fringe of his Liripipium.
This done, the rest of my companions
withdrew, but I alone remained. Then
he motioned to the young attendants that they
too should withdraw, and he wanted me to sit
beside him, and in the Spanish language,
he began in this manner.
   May God bless you, my son. I will impart
to you a most precious gem, from among those
which I possess: for indeed I shall not hesitate,
for the love of God and men, to reveal to you
the true state of Solomon's House. Son, so that
you may clearly know the true state of Solomon's
House, I will proceed in this order. First, I will
declare the purpose of our foundation: Second,
the apparatus and instruments with which we are
equipped for our works: Third, the distinct offices
and functions which are assigned to our companions:
Lastly, the ordinances and rites which we
observe.
   The purpose of our foundation is the knowledge
of the causes, and motions, and inner virtues
in nature, and the enlargement of the bounds
of human empire, to every possible extent.
   But our apparatus and instruments are
these. We have spacious
                                                               caves,

--- Page 770 ---
66 FRANCIS BACON
large, and deep, of various depths. The deepest of them will extend down to six hundred fathoms. And some of them have been dug out under great mountains, so that if you consider the total depth of the cavern, some of them are three miles deep. For we have found that the height of the mountain, up to the plain, and the depth of the cave from the plain, are truly the same, both being equally removed from the Sun, and celestial rays, and open air. These caves we call the lowest region. But we use them for all coagulations, indurations, refrigerations, and preservations of bodies. We also use them to imitate natural mines; and for the production of new artificial metals, from materials and cements which we prepare there, and bury for many years. We sometimes use them (which may seem strange) for the cure of certain diseases, and the prolongation of life, in some hermits who prefer to live there, well supplied with all necessary things, who are certainly very long-lived; from whom we also learn many things.

We also have other burials of bodies

--- Page 771 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 67
natural bodies, and materials, not in
any hollow, but in the contiguous earth itself,
where we store several cements, as the Chi-
nese store their porcelain. But
we have them in greater variety, and some
of them more elegant than Chinese porcelain.
Moreover, we have a great variety of fertilizations
and manures, likewise of other accumulations
and masses, which enrich the earth and render
it fertile.

We have very high Towers, the highest of
which rise, by a perpendicular line, up to the height
of half a mile. But some of them are
situated upon high mountains, so that, if you
combine the height of the mountain and the height
of the tower together, the height extends in
some of them, up to at least three miles.
Moreover, we call these places the highest region,
estimating the entire tract of air, between
the highest and the lowest, as the middle region
of the air. We use these towers, as is suitable
for their different heights and locations,
for insolation, cooling, preservation, and for
observing various meteors, such as winds,
rains, snows, hails, and some of the fiery meteors.
And also, above

--- Page 772 ---
68 FRANCIS BACON'S
above them, in some places, are situated the habitations of Hermits, whom we sometimes visit, and moreover, we instruct them what they ought to observe.

We have large lakes, both salt and fresh, and we use them for supplying us with fish, and also marsh and aquatic birds of every kind. We also use them for the burials of certain natural bodies. For we have found a difference in the operation of things which are buried in the earth, or in subterranean air, and those which are submerged in water. We have ponds, in some of which fresh water is filtered from salt, but in others, by art, fresh water is changed into salt. We have moreover rocks in the middle of the sea, and certain sunny places on the very shores, for performing certain works in which the sea air is required. We also have rapid whirlpools and cataracts, for the use of many violent motions; for a similar use, we have many machines which catch, multiply, and strengthen winds.

We also have many wells and artificial springs, made in imitation of natural springs and baths,

--- Page 773 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 69
...made, tinged with vitriol, sulfur, steel, bronze,
lead, saltpeter, and other minerals:
we have moreover wells, and small receptacles,
for the infusion of many things;
where water, (running, that is,) receives the virtue
of bodies, better and more vigorously, than in vessels,
and bowls. Among these we have
some, in which is made water, which
we call, of paradise, by certain
preparations of ours, made very healthy and effective,
for health, and longevity.
      We have also large and spa-
cious buildings; in which we exhibit imitations and repre-
sentations of atmospheric phenomena: such as,
snow, hail, rain, artificial rains
from mixed bodies (not waters),
thunder, lightning, flashes,
and the generation of insects and small animals
in the air, such as frogs, flies,
locusts and others.
      We have also certain rooms,
which we call rooms of health, where we
tint and temper the air at will,
as we judge it to be conducive, and proper,
for the cures of many diseases,
and the preservation of health.
      We have also beautiful, and spa-
cious baths, from various mixtures, for the cure
                                          of many...

--- Page 774 ---
**FRANCIS BACON'S**
of many diseases, and for the restoration of the human
body from desiccation, and likewise for the strengthening
and invigorating of the nerves, vital parts, and even
of the very juices and substance of the body.
    We also have large and varied orchards and gardens,
in which, not so much the beauty of walks
and similar things is dear to us, as the variety of soil and ground,
proper to different trees and herbs. Some
of these, moreover, are planted with trees and berries
for preparing several kinds of drinks, besides vineyards. In these also
we make experiments in grafting and inoculating
trees, both wild
and fruit-bearing, which produce many and great
effects. And we bring about
by art, in these same orchards and gardens,
that fruits and flowers may come forth sooner
or later, than according to their season: likewise,
that they may sprout, germinate, and bear fruit at shorter
intervals than their nature
has accustomed them to. We also make trees and plants
larger than their nature
allows; and their fruits larger and sweeter;
and differing in taste, smell, color, and
figure from their own species: and many
of these we so prepare, that for medicinal
                                        uses

--- Page 775 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 71
may be effective for medicinal uses. We also have methods by
which we make many plants grow and increase by mere mixtures of earth, without seed; and
we also produce new and unknown plants, differing from common ones,
and we transmute plants from one species into another.
   We also have enclosures and vivaria for
all kinds of beasts and birds; which we use not
so much for their novelty and rarity,
as for dissections and anatomical experiments,
so that from them we may receive light on what can be done
concerning the human body. In these, we have found many wonderful
effects, such as the continuation of life in them,
even though some parts, which you consider vital, may have perished
or been extracted; the resuscitation of some,
which were, to all appearance, dead,
and similar things. We also make experiments
on them with all poisons, for antidotes
and other medicines, both surgical and medicinal,
so that we may better protect the human body. By art,
we also make some larger and taller
than their nature; on the contrary, we make others
dwarfs and deprive them of their just stature.
Furthermore, we make others more fertile and more numerous in
                                offspring

--- Page 776 ---
72      FRANCIS BACON
...numerous in offspring than their nature
bears; on the contrary, others sterile, and unfit
for generation. Also in color, shape, and
spirit, we vary them in many ways.
We also procure mixtures and copulations
of animals of diverse species,
which have produced new species, and yet
not sterile, as common opinion holds.
Moreover, we produce several kinds of ser-
pents, worms, flies, fish, from
putrefaction, some of which
mature into perfect species, such
as birds, or beasts, or other fish: and
are distinguished by sex, and generate. Nor
do we do this by chance, but we know well
from what material what kind of animal can be
produced.
   We also have particular fishponds,
where we try similar things with fish, which
we previously spoke of concerning beasts, and birds.
   We also have proper places for the genera-
tion of such worms, and flies, which
are unknown to you, and especially
useful: such as silkworms, and bees, are among you.
   I will not delay you by recounting
what kind of houses we have for making
wine, cider, beer, and other drinks, or
                                       for

--- Page 777 ---
NEW ATLANTIS. 73
for making all kinds of bread: or
kitchens, in which are made and prepared
broths, rare and unusual foods, for special
purposes. We have wines from grapes:
likewise drinks from other fruit juices, decoctions
of grains and roots, and mixtures of honey,
sugar, manna, many fruits (dried, as they do
with grapes), also from the saps of trees, and the pith
of reeds. Moreover, these drinks are of various
ages, some preserved up to the fortieth year.
We also have medicated drinks from infusions
and mixtures of various roots, herbs, spices,
and even with meats, eggs, dairy products, and other
edibles sometimes added, from which some are
like food and drink combined, so much so that
many, especially those of advanced age, live on
these alone, with little or no use of food or
bread. And above all, we strive to make drinks
of the finest particles, so that they may more
easily penetrate the body, but without any biting
quality, acrimony, or corrosion: so much so that
some of them, placed on the back of the hand,
after a short delay, will almost imperceptibly
penetrate to the palm; yet they will not bite
the tongue or palate. We also have
                                  d                      water

--- Page 778 ---
74        FRANCIS BACON
waters which we so ripen that they become plainly nutritious and turn into excellent drinks; from which many are unwilling to use any other drink. We have breads from various grains, roots, nuts, and acorns; some also from dried meats and fish, with various kinds of ferments and seasonings, of which some, in a wonderful way, stimulate appetite, while others are so nutritious that many live on them alone, without other food, and yet are generally long-lived. We have foods which we so pound, tenderize, and render digestible, but nevertheless without any degree of putrefaction, that the heat of a weak stomach easily converts them into good chyle, no less effectively than the heat of a strong stomach can act upon common foods. We have certain kinds of food, bread, and drink which, when taken, will enable one to tolerate fasting longer than usual; others likewise, to which those who accustom themselves, become of harder and more solid flesh than before; then also their strength, for any movement, is increased and intensified.
    We also have dispensaries, or workshops of medicines; in which it is easy to imagine, since we, with such a great abundance and variety of plants and animals, beyond you

--- Page 779 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 75
in Europe, abound, (for we know well what is found among you,) that likewise simples, Medicines, and ingredients for Medicines ought to be so much more varied, and manifold. There also we have medicines of different ages, and of long fermentation. But as for the preparations of medicines, not only do we have all kinds of exquisite distillations, and separations, especially however through gentle heats, and percolations, through different linens, wools, woods, and even more solid substances, but much more excellent methods of compounding, by which we achieve such an incorporation of compounds, that they seem almost natural simples.

We also have several mechanical arts unknown to you, and materials made by them, such as papers, linens, silks, textiles, sewn from feathers of most elegant and wonderful splendor, most beautiful dyes and colorings, and many other things. Indeed, and also workshops of some of the aforesaid arts, both of those, which have not been received into common use, as of those which are. For you ought to know, from those things which I have already enumerated,
                                  *d* 2                      com-

--- Page 780 ---
76 FRANCIS BACON
many things are in use throughout the whole kingdom, although, if they have flowed from our invention, we sometimes retain copies of them in our house, as original and most excellently elaborated.
	We also have very diverse furnaces, which exhibit and maintain diverse degrees of heat, namely, of a sharp and swift kind, robust and persistent, gentle and moderate, blown, tranquil, humid, dry, and similar. But above all, we administer heats in imitation of the heat of the Sun, and of celestial bodies, which pass through multiple inequalities, and as it were, orbits, progressions, and periods, through which we bring forth wonderful works. Nor do we lack imitations of the heat of dung; and of the bellies of animals, and of their blood and bodies themselves: of hay, and of herbs piled up and enclosed while they are humid: of quicklime, and of other things. Likewise, we have instruments which excite heat by motion alone: and moreover, places for strong insolations, and again, subterranean places, which, either by nature or by art, excite heats. We exhibit these diverse heats, as the nature of the operation which we design demands.
				Habe-

--- Page 781 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 77
We also have perspective houses,
where we exhibit experiments of all
colors; and from transparent and uncolored
bodies, we represent individual
colors: not gliding in the form of rainbows,
(as happens in gems and prisms,)
but by themselves, simple, and constant.
Moreover, we exhibit every multiplication
of rays, so that we project light
to great distances; and we have given it
such power and strength, that by means
of such light, the finest lines and points
can be seen. We exhibit every kind of
dyed and colored light, and all illusions
and deceptions of sight, in figures, magnitudes,
motions, colors; all demonstrations
of shadows, and of images floating in
the air. We have also discovered several
means, unknown to you, of producing original
light from diverse bodies. Again, we have
discovered devices, by which very remote
objects may appear to the eyes, as if in the
Sky, and other remote places. Indeed, we
also show what is near as if from afar, and
what is far as if near, exhibiting distances
feigned at will. Moreover,
               *d* 3               we have-

--- Page 782 ---
78 FRANCIS BACON
we have optical aids, which in use
far excel your spectacles and lenses.
We also have devices and magnifying
glasses, by which we distinctly and perfectly
discern minute and tiny bodies; such as
the limbs and colors of tiny flies and
worms; grains and inclusions in gems
otherwise not visible; many things in urine
and blood, likewise otherwise not visible.
Furthermore, we exhibit artificial rainbows,
halos, circles, vibrations, and scintillations
of light. Finally, we exhibit all modes of
reflection, refraction, and duplication of
objects.
    We also have gems of all kinds, and
many of them most beautiful and unknown
to you: likewise crystals and glasses of
various kinds, among these, however, some
from vitrified metals, and some other
materials, besides those from which glasses
are made among us. Then also many
minerals, which you do not have. Likewise
magnets of prodigious power, and other
rare stones, both natural and artificial.
    We also have houses of sound, where
we experiment with and demonstrate all
sounds, and their productions. We have
                                                    har-

--- Page 783 ---
**NOVUS ATLAS. 79**
harmonies, which are not in use among you,
mixing not only that sharp semitone
and flat, as you do, but quarter-tones,
and some most sweet tremulous sounds.
We have musical instruments, which to you
have not yet become known, some of them
exhibiting a sweeter melody than
yours. Also bells and chimes
of most pleasant sound. We exhibit faint sounds
as if great and deep; similarly
as if attenuated, and sharp. Then we feign
many tremblings from sounds,
which in their first origin are whole.
We exhibit and imitate all sounds,
articulated, and letters, likewise voices, and songs,
of quadrupeds, and birds. We have
also aids to hearing, which applied to the ears,
greatly promote the sense itself,
and the transmission of sounds.
We have reflections of voices (which
you call Echo), several marvelous and artificial,
not only multiplying and throwing about the voice many times,
but of them, at other times, the voice

--- Page 784 ---
FRANCIS BACON

a great distance, and in winding lines.

We also have houses of suffumigations and odors, where we also add experiments of tastes. There we multiply and strengthen odors (which might seem strange). We imitate natural odors, making all kinds of odors emanate from other mixtures rather than from their genuine sources. Similarly, we also imitate tastes, so that they completely deceive the taste, however accurate. In this house is also contained a confectionary, where we make sweets, cakes, and other such things, both moist and dry: indeed, we even preserve them with other very pleasing sweet things, besides sugar and honey. There we make most pleasant wines, dairy products, broths, salted foods, and salads, certainly pleasing to the taste, and by no means in use among you.

We also have houses of Machines, where machines and instruments are ready for all kinds of motions. There we try to produce motions faster than any you have among you, whether from your smaller firearms or any other machine. We also try to make motions easier and more intense, by multiplying them through wheels and other methods. Then motions to produce

--- Page 785 ---
NOVUS ATLAS. 81
we produce stronger and more powerful [motions] than you have in your larger cannons and any basilisks. We exhibit war engines and machines of every kind; new mixtures of gunpowder; Greek fires burning in water and inextinguishable; projectile fires in every variety, both for pleasure and for use. There we imitate the flight of birds; we have certain means and conveniences of transport through the air, like winged animals. We have ships and boats which can navigate under the waters and better endure the furies of the sea; also belts for swimming and floats. We have several exquisite clocks, and other motions of air and waters, returning in a circle and periodically; likewise some perpetual motions. We imitate the motions of animals in their likenesses: as, in likenesses of men, quadrupeds, birds, fish, and serpents. Finally, we have other motions, remarkable for their regularity and subtlety.

      We also have a Mathematical house, where all instruments, both Geometrical and Astronomical, most exquisite, are displayed.
                  *d* 5                  We have

--- Page 786 ---
82          OF FRANCIS BACON
      We also have a House of Illu-
sions, where we display all kinds of tricks, im-
postures & illusions, & their deceptions.
But you will easily believe that we, who
have so many truly natural things, which
move admiration, can also impose infinite
things on men's senses; if we wished to
adorn & exalt them into a miracle.
But we hate all imposture & false-
hood. Moreover, to all members of our
house, under penalty of ignominy & fine, we have
strictly forbidden that they should display
anything from natural things falsi-
fied by artificial apparatus; but only what
is pure, & immune from all disguise, & af-
fectation of miracle. And these are, (son,) the
riches of Salomon's House.
      As for the functions & duties of our
members, we have twelve, who sail to fo-
reign regions, under the name of other na-
tions, (for we do not reveal our land:)
who bring books, materials & models of
experiments to us. We call these Merchants
of Light.
      We have three, who collect experiments,
whatever are found in books. We call
these Depredators.
                                          Three

--- Page 787 ---
NOVUS ATLAS.      83

We have three who collect experiments of all mechanical arts; and also of the liberal sciences, moreover, and of all practical things which have not yet coalesced into an art. These we call Hunters. We have three who apply themselves to new experiments, as it shall seem expedient to them. These we call Diggers, or Miners. We have three who digest the experiments of the aforementioned others into titles and tables, so that the intellect may better operate upon them, for drawing out from them observations and axioms. These we call Dividers. We have three who are ordained for this purpose, that they may look into the experiments of their fellows, and from them extract and devise discoveries which pertain to the use of life and practice, as well as those which serve the sciences, not only as regards works, but also for clear demonstrations of causes, methods of eliciting natural predictions, or easy and manifest information as to what are the latent parts in individual bodies, what virtues? These we call Benefactors. Then indeed, after many meetings and consultations of all the fellows, who thoroughly intro-

--- Page 788 ---
84          FRANCIS BACON'S
...examine, and as it were ruminate upon, we ha-
ve three whose task it is, from those things which are already
before our eyes, to devise and direct new experiments, of a more
sublime light, and penetrating more deeply into nature. These we call
lamps. We have three who actually carry out the ex-
periments thus enjoined and commanded, and report their results.
These we call planters. Lastly, we have three
who raise and promote the former inventions and revelations
in nature, through experiments, into major observations, axioms, and apho-
risms, which they do, not without con-
sultation and discussion, previously held with all the companions. These
we call interpreters of nature.
     We also have, (as the matter itself demands,)
certain novices and apprentices, so that the succession
of men designated for experiments and axioms
may not fail, besides many ser-
vants and ministers, both men
and women: this also is our custom, that we accurately
deliberate which of our inventions and experiments, brought to
light, it is fitting to publish, and which by no means.
Moreover, we all bind ourselves by an oath to conceal
those things which we have decided to conceal: although some of
                                                                them,

--- Page 789 ---
NEW ATLANTIS. 85
some of them, with consent, we sometimes reveal to the king or to the senate; while others we keep entirely within our knowledge.
As for our ordinances and rites, we have two spacious and beautiful galleries. In one of these, we arrange in order, models of all the rarer and more excellent inventions, while in the other, statues of the more distinguished inventors; there one can see a statue of your Columbus, who first opened up the West Indies. Likewise, of the first builder of ships. Also, of your monk, who first invented fiery engines and gunpowder. Also, of the inventor of music. Also, of the inventor of letters. Also, of the inventor of printing with types. Also, of the inventor of astronomical observations. Also, of the inventor of working with metals. Also, of the inventor of glass. Also, of the inventor of silk thread. Also, of the inventor of wine. Also, of the inventor of crops and bread. Also, of the inventor of sugar. And all these inventors, we preserve among us, from a tradition more certain and faithful than is held among you. Then we have statues of several more distinguished inventors from among our own people, who discovered noble things and works: Which, since they themselves

--- Page 790 ---
86      FRANCIS BACON'S
since you yourselves have not seen, to make descriptions of them would be too lengthy, and then in rightly understanding them, it would be easy to err. For indeed, to the inventor of any more worthy thing, we soon erect a statue, and bestow upon him a sufficiently generous honorarium. Of these statues, some are of bronze, of marble, and Lydian stone; others are of cedar and certain other precious woods, gilded and adorned; others of iron; others of silver; some of gold.

    We also have certain hymns and forms of liturgies, which we daily sing and recite; with these we resound praises and jubilees, and thanksgivings to God, because of His wondrous works: likewise certain forms of prayers, with which we implore His help and blessing, that He may deign to direct and illuminate our labors, and convert them to good and holy uses.

    Lastly, it is customary among us to visit and frequent the principal cities in the kingdom, in which, (as occasion offers itself) we reveal such useful inventions as we deem fit. We also predict, before they arrive, (which pertains to natural predictions,) epidemi-
                                                                cal diseases,

--- Page 791 ---
**A NEW ATLANTIS.** 87
diseases, plagues, swarms of harmful animals, famine, storms and tempests, earthquakes, floods of water, comets, the temperature of the year, and other things: moreover, we give advice on these matters, and what it is fitting for the people to do for the prevention and remedies of such evils.
   And when he had said these things, he raised himself to his feet: but I, as I had been instructed, fell on my knees, whereupon, placing his right hand on my head, he said: May God bless you, my son; may God likewise bless this account which I have made. I grant you permission to publish it for the good of other nations. For indeed we live here in the bosom of God; a nation entirely unknown to others. Having spoken these things, he departed: Moreover, he had assigned about two thousand Aurei, as a gift, to be counted out to me and my companions. For they are great benefactors, wherever they may come, etc.

            **THE END.**

[A small decorative floral ornament consisting of three stylized clusters, possibly grapes, hanging from a central vine]

--- Page 792 ---
NOVUS ATLAS.      87
diseases, plagues, swarms of harmful animals, famine, storms and tempests, earthquakes, floods of waters, comets, the temperature of the year, and other things: nay, we even give advice on these matters, and what it is proper for the people to do, for the preventions and remedies of such evils.
   And when he had said these things, he raised himself to his feet: but I, as I had been instructed, fell to my knees, whereupon placing his right hand on my head, he said: May God bless you, my son, and may God likewise bless this account which I have made. I grant you permission to publish it for the good of other nations. For indeed we live here in the bosom of God; a nation entirely unknown to others.
   Having spoken these things, he departed: And he had assigned about two thousand Aurei, as a gift, to be counted out to me and my companions. For they are great benefactors, wherever they may come, etc.

            T H E E N D .

[The following text is from a circular blue library stamp on the current page:]

**PROPERTY OF ST. ANNA'S COLLEGE**
**IN**
**AUGSBURG**

--- Page 793 ---
There is no Latin text provided on the current page for translation. The image appears to be a blank page.

The text from the previous page's library stamp is in German, not Latin. Here is the translation of the stamp:

**PROPERTY OF ST. ANNA COLLEGE**
**IN**
**AUGSBURG**

--- Page 794 ---
There is no Latin text provided on this page to translate.

The page itself is a blank, heavily aged sheet, likely a flyleaf from an old book. It shows extensive signs of deterioration, including prominent foxing, staining, and heavy creasing throughout. Although there are extremely faint and illegible marks visible, which appear to be either bleed-through from the reverse side or ghosting from an adjacent page, they are too faded and blurred to be deciphered. Therefore, no legible content can be transcribed from this page.

--- Page 795 ---
No. 12, Natural.
Bacon

--- Page 796 ---
No legible Latin text is present on the provided page. The image shows a blank page with only faint, illegible marks that appear to be bleed-through from the reverse side.

--- Page 797 ---
The provided text "12° / Vat. / Ba [obscured by a dark vertical rectangular object]" does not contain any Latin to translate.

This appears to be a cataloging or archival notation:
*   **12°**: Likely refers to the book format, duodecimo (a book size resulting from folding each printed sheet into 12 leaves or 24 pages).
*   **Vat.**: Abbreviation for "Vatican," likely indicating the Vatican Library as the source or collection.
*   **Ba**: Likely part of a shelfmark or call number.

Since there is no Latin text present, no translation can be provided.

--- Page 798 ---
The image provided depicts a blank page with no visible text.

The "Previous page text for continuity" is:
12°
Vat.
Ba [obscured by a dark vertical rectangular object]

This text is not Latin; it appears to be a catalog number or shelf mark.

Therefore, there is no Latin text to translate on the current page or the previous page.
